<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon 1 Samuel 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>1 Samuel</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S11_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S12_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S13_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S14_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S15_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S16_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S17_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S18_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S19_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S110_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S111_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S112_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S113_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S114_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S115_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S116_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S117_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S118_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S119_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S120_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S121_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S122_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S123_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S124_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S125_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S126_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S127_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S128_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S129_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S130_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='1SA.xhtml#S131_0'>31</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='S10_0'>

<div class='mt'>The First Book of Samuel  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S11_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="S11_1">1&#160;</span>Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim Zophim, of the hill country of Ephraim, and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_2">2&#160;</span>He had two wives. The name of one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah. Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_3">3&#160;</span>This man went up out of his city from year to year to worship and to sacrifice to Yahweh<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of Armies in Shiloh. The two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests to Yahweh, were there. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_4">4&#160;</span>When the day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he gave portions to Peninnah his wife and to all her sons and her daughters; 
<span class="verse" id="S11_5">5&#160;</span>but he gave a double portion to Hannah, for he loved Hannah, but Yahweh had shut up her womb. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_6">6&#160;</span>Her rival provoked her severely, to irritate her, because Yahweh had shut up her womb. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_7">7&#160;</span>So year by year, when she went up to Yahweh’s house, her rival provoked her. Therefore she wept, and didn’t eat. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_8">8&#160;</span>Elkanah her husband said to her, “Hannah, why do you weep? Why don’t you eat? Why is your heart grieved? Am I not better to you than ten sons?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_9">9&#160;</span>So Hannah rose up after they had finished eating and drinking in Shiloh. Now Eli the priest was sitting on his seat by the doorpost of Yahweh’s temple. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_10">10&#160;</span>She was in bitterness of soul, and prayed to Yahweh, weeping bitterly. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_11">11&#160;</span>She vowed a vow, and said, “Yahweh of Armies, if you will indeed look at the affliction of your servant and remember me, and not forget your servant, but will give to your servant a boy, then I will give him to Yahweh all the days of his life, and no razor shall come on his head.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_12">12&#160;</span>As she continued praying before Yahweh, Eli saw her mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_13">13&#160;</span>Now Hannah spoke in her heart. Only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. Therefore Eli thought she was drunk. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_14">14&#160;</span>Eli said to her, “How long will you be drunk? Get rid of your wine!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_15">15&#160;</span>Hannah answered, “No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit. I have not been drinking wine or strong drink, but I poured out my soul before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_16">16&#160;</span>Don’t consider your servant a wicked woman; for I have been speaking out of the abundance of my complaint and my provocation.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_17">17&#160;</span>Then Eli answered, “Go in peace; and may the God<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of Israel grant your petition that you have asked of him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_18">18&#160;</span>She said, “Let your servant find favor in your sight.” So the woman went her way and ate; and her facial expression wasn’t sad any more. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_19">19&#160;</span>They rose up in the morning early and worshiped Yahweh, then returned and came to their house to Ramah. Then Elkanah knew Hannah his wife; and Yahweh remembered her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_20">20&#160;</span>When the time had come, Hannah conceived, and bore a son; and she named him Samuel,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> saying, “Because I have asked him of Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_21">21&#160;</span>The man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer to Yahweh the yearly sacrifice and his vow. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_22">22&#160;</span>But Hannah didn’t go up, for she said to her husband, “Not until the child is weaned; then I will bring him, that he may appear before Yahweh, and stay there forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S11_23">23&#160;</span>Elkanah her husband said to her, “Do what seems good to you. Wait until you have weaned him; only may Yahweh establish his word.” </div>
<div class='p'>So the woman waited and nursed her son until she weaned him. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_24">24&#160;</span>When she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bulls, and one ephah<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of meal, and a container of wine, and brought him to Yahweh’s house in Shiloh. The child was young. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_25">25&#160;</span>They killed the bull, and brought the child to Eli. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_26">26&#160;</span>She said, “Oh, my lord, as your soul lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood by you here, praying to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_27">27&#160;</span>I prayed for this child, and Yahweh has given me my petition which I asked of him. 
<span class="verse" id="S11_28">28&#160;</span>Therefore I have also given him to Yahweh. As long as he lives he is given to Yahweh.” He worshiped Yahweh there.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S12_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_1">1&#160;</span>Hannah prayed, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>“My heart exults in Yahweh! </div>
<div class='q2'>My horn is exalted in Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>My mouth is enlarged over my enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>because I rejoice in your salvation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_2">2&#160;</span>There is no one as holy as Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there is no one besides you, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor is there any rock like our God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_3">3&#160;</span>“Don’t keep talking so exceedingly proudly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let arrogance come out of your mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh is a God of knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>By him actions are weighed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_4">4&#160;</span>“The bows of the mighty men are broken. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who stumbled are armed with strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_5">5&#160;</span>Those who were full have hired themselves out for bread. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who were hungry are satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, the barren has borne seven. </div>
<div class='q2'>She who has many children languishes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_6">6&#160;</span>“Yahweh kills and makes alive. </div>
<div class='q2'>He brings down to Sheol<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and brings up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh makes poor and makes rich. </div>
<div class='q2'>He brings low, he also lifts up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_8">8&#160;</span>He raises up the poor out of the dust. </div>
<div class='q2'>He lifts up the needy from the dunghill </div>
<div class='q2'>to make them sit with princes </div>
<div class='q2'>and inherit the throne of glory. </div>
<div class='q'>For the pillars of the earth are Yahweh’s. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has set the world on them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_9">9&#160;</span>He will keep the feet of his holy ones, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wicked will be put to silence in darkness; </div>
<div class='q2'>for no man will prevail by strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_10">10&#160;</span>Those who strive with Yahweh shall be broken to pieces. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will thunder against them in the sky. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“Yahweh will judge the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will give strength to his king, </div>
<div class='q2'>and exalt the horn of his anointed.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_11">11&#160;</span>Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. The child served Yahweh before Eli the priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_12">12&#160;</span>Now the sons of Eli were wicked men. They didn’t know Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_13">13&#160;</span>The custom of the priests with the people was that when anyone offered a sacrifice, the priest’s servant came while the meat was boiling, with a fork of three teeth in his hand; 
<span class="verse" id="S12_14">14&#160;</span>and he stabbed it into the pan, or kettle, or cauldron, or pot. The priest took all that the fork brought up for himself. They did this to all the Israelites who came there to Shiloh. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_15">15&#160;</span>Yes, before they burned the fat, the priest’s servant came, and said to the man who sacrificed, “Give meat to roast for the priest; for he will not accept boiled meat from you, but raw.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_16">16&#160;</span>If the man said to him, “Let the fat be burned first, and then take as much as your soul desires;” then he would say, “No, but you shall give it to me now; and if not, I will take it by force.” 
<span class="verse" id="S12_17">17&#160;</span>The sin of the young men was very great before Yahweh; for the men despised Yahweh’s offering. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_18">18&#160;</span>But Samuel ministered before Yahweh, being a child, clothed with a linen ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_19">19&#160;</span>Moreover his mother made him a little robe, and brought it to him from year to year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_20">20&#160;</span>Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, “May Yahweh give you offspring<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> from this woman for the petition which was asked of Yahweh.” Then they went to their own home. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh visited Hannah, and she conceived and bore three sons and two daughters. The child Samuel grew before Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_22">22&#160;</span>Now Eli was very old; and he heard all that his sons did to all Israel, and how that they slept with the women who served at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_23">23&#160;</span>He said to them, “Why do you do such things? For I hear of your evil dealings from all these people. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_24">24&#160;</span>No, my sons; for it is not a good report that I hear! You make Yahweh’s people disobey. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_25">25&#160;</span>If one man sins against another, God will judge him; but if a man sins against Yahweh, who will intercede for him?” Notwithstanding, they didn’t listen to the voice of their father, because Yahweh intended to kill them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_26">26&#160;</span>The child Samuel grew on, and increased in favor both with Yahweh and also with men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S12_27">27&#160;</span>A man of God came to Eli and said to him, “Yahweh says, ‘Did I reveal myself to the house of your father when they were in Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh’s house? 
<span class="verse" id="S12_28">28&#160;</span>Didn’t I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? Didn’t I give to the house of your father all the offerings of the children of Israel made by fire? 
<span class="verse" id="S12_29">29&#160;</span>Why do you kick at my sacrifice and at my offering, which I have commanded in my habitation, and honor your sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the best of all the offerings of Israel my people?’ 
<span class="verse" id="S12_30">30&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘I said indeed that your house and the house of your father should walk before me forever.’ But now Yahweh says, ‘Far be it from me; for those who honor me I will honor, and those who despise me will be cursed. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_31">31&#160;</span>Behold,<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> the days come that I will cut off your arm and the arm of your father’s house, that there will not be an old man in your house. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_32">32&#160;</span>You will see the affliction of my habitation, in all the wealth which I will give Israel. There shall not be an old man in your house forever. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_33">33&#160;</span>The man of yours whom I don’t cut off from my altar will consume your eyes<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> and grieve your heart. All the increase of your house will die in the flower of their age. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_34">34&#160;</span>This will be the sign to you that will come on your two sons, on Hophni and Phinehas: in one day they will both die. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_35">35&#160;</span>I will raise up a faithful priest for myself who will do according to that which is in my heart and in my mind. I will build him a sure house. He will walk before my anointed forever. 
<span class="verse" id="S12_36">36&#160;</span>It will happen that everyone who is left in your house will come and bow down to him for a piece of silver and a loaf of bread, and will say, “Please put me into one of the priests’ offices, that I may eat a morsel of bread.” ’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S13_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_1">1&#160;</span>The child Samuel ministered to Yahweh before Eli. Yahweh’s word was rare in those days. There were not many visions, then. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_2">2&#160;</span>At that time, when Eli was laid down in his place (now his eyes had begun to grow dim, so that he could not see), 
<span class="verse" id="S13_3">3&#160;</span>and God’s lamp hadn’t yet gone out, and Samuel had laid down in Yahweh’s temple where God’s ark was, 
<span class="verse" id="S13_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh called Samuel. He said, “Here I am.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_5">5&#160;</span>He ran to Eli and said, “Here I am; for you called me.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I didn’t call. Lie down again.” </div>
<div class='p'>He went and lay down. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh called yet again, “Samuel!” </div>
<div class='p'>Samuel arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am; for you called me.” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “I didn’t call, my son. Lie down again.” 
<span class="verse" id="S13_7">7&#160;</span>Now Samuel didn’t yet know Yahweh, neither was Yahweh’s word yet revealed to him. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh called Samuel again the third time. He arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am; for you called me.” </div>
<div class='p'>Eli perceived that Yahweh had called the child. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore Eli said to Samuel, “Go, lie down. It shall be, if he calls you, that you shall say, ‘Speak, Yahweh; for your servant hears.’ ” So Samuel went and lay down in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh came, and stood, and called as at other times, “Samuel! Samuel!” </div>
<div class='p'>Then Samuel said, “Speak; for your servant hears.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Samuel, “Behold, I will do a thing in Israel at which both the ears of everyone who hears it will tingle. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_12">12&#160;</span>In that day I will perform against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even to the end. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_13">13&#160;</span>For I have told him that I will judge his house forever for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons brought a curse on themselves, and he didn’t restrain them. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli’s house shall not be removed with sacrifice or offering forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_15">15&#160;</span>Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of Yahweh’s house. Samuel was afraid to show Eli the vision. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_16">16&#160;</span>Then Eli called Samuel and said, “Samuel, my son!” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Here I am.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_17">17&#160;</span>He said, “What is the thing that he has spoken to you? Please don’t hide it from me. God do so to you, and more also, if you hide anything from me of all the things that he spoke to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_18">18&#160;</span>Samuel told him every bit, and hid nothing from him. </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “It is Yahweh. Let him do what seems good to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S13_19">19&#160;</span>Samuel grew, and Yahweh was with him and let none of his words fall to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_20">20&#160;</span>All Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S13_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh appeared again in Shiloh; for Yahweh revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by Yahweh’s word.  
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S14_0'>4</div>
<span class="verse" id="S14_1">1&#160;</span>The word of Samuel came to all Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and encamped beside Ebenezer; and the Philistines encamped in Aphek. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_2">2&#160;</span>The Philistines put themselves in array against Israel. When they joined battle, Israel was defeated by the Philistines, who killed about four thousand men of the army in the field. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_3">3&#160;</span>When the people had come into the camp, the elders of Israel said, “Why has Yahweh defeated us today before the Philistines? Let’s get the ark of Yahweh’s covenant out of Shiloh and bring it to us, that it may come among us and save us out of the hand of our enemies.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_4">4&#160;</span>So the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought from there the ark of the covenant of Yahweh of Armies, who sits above the cherubim; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_5">5&#160;</span>When the ark of Yahweh’s covenant came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth resounded. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_6">6&#160;</span>When the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, “What does the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews mean?” They understood that Yahweh’s ark had come into the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_7">7&#160;</span>The Philistines were afraid, for they said, “God has come into the camp.” They said, “Woe to us! For there has not been such a thing before. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_8">8&#160;</span>Woe to us! Who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods that struck the Egyptians with all kinds of plagues in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_9">9&#160;</span>Be strong and behave like men, O you Philistines, that you not be servants to the Hebrews, as they have been to you. Strengthen yourselves like men, and fight!” 
<span class="verse" id="S14_10">10&#160;</span>The Philistines fought, and Israel was defeated, and each man fled to his tent. There was a very great slaughter; for thirty thousand footmen of Israel fell. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_11">11&#160;</span>God’s ark was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were slain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_12">12&#160;</span>A man of Benjamin ran out of the army and came to Shiloh the same day, with his clothes torn and with dirt on his head. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_13">13&#160;</span>When he came, behold, Eli was sitting on his seat by the road watching, for his heart trembled for God’s ark. When the man came into the city and told about it, all the city cried out. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_14">14&#160;</span>When Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, “What does the noise of this tumult mean?” </div>
<div class='p'>The man hurried, and came and told Eli. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_15">15&#160;</span>Now Eli was ninety-eight years old. His eyes were set, so that he could not see. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_16">16&#160;</span>The man said to Eli, “I am he who came out of the army, and I fled today out of the army.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “How did the matter go, my son?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_17">17&#160;</span>He who brought the news answered, “Israel has fled before the Philistines, and there has been also a great slaughter among the people. Your two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and God’s ark has been captured.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_18">18&#160;</span>When he made mention of God’s ark, Eli fell from off his seat backward by the side of the gate; and his neck broke, and he died, for he was an old man and heavy. He had judged Israel forty years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S14_19">19&#160;</span>His daughter-in-law, Phinehas’ wife, was with child, near to giving birth. When she heard the news that God’s ark was taken and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and gave birth; for her pains came on her. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_20">20&#160;</span>About the time of her death the women who stood by her said to her, “Don’t be afraid, for you have given birth to a son.” But she didn’t answer, neither did she regard it. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_21">21&#160;</span>She named the child Ichabod,<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> saying, “The glory has departed from Israel!” because God’s ark was taken, and because of her father-in-law and her husband. 
<span class="verse" id="S14_22">22&#160;</span>She said, “The glory has departed from Israel; for God’s ark has been taken.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S15_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_1">1&#160;</span>Now the Philistines had taken God’s ark, and they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_2">2&#160;</span>The Philistines took God’s ark, and brought it into the house of Dagon and set it by Dagon. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_3">3&#160;</span>When the people of Ashdod arose early on the next day, behold, Dagon had fallen on his face to the ground before Yahweh’s ark. They took Dagon and set him in his place again. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_4">4&#160;</span>When they arose early on the following morning, behold, Dagon had fallen on his face to the ground before Yahweh’s ark; and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off on the threshold. Only Dagon’s torso was intact. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_5">5&#160;</span>Therefore neither the priests of Dagon nor any who come into Dagon’s house step on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_6">6&#160;</span>But Yahweh’s hand was heavy on the people of Ashdod, and he destroyed them and struck them with tumors, even Ashdod and its borders. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S15_7">7&#160;</span>When the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, “The ark of the God of Israel shall not stay with us, for his hand is severe on us and on Dagon our god.” 
<span class="verse" id="S15_8">8&#160;</span>They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and said, “What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel?” </div>
<div class='p'>They answered, “Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried over to Gath.” They carried the ark of the God of Israel there. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_9">9&#160;</span>It was so, that after they had carried it there, Yahweh’s hand was against the city with a very great confusion; and he struck the men of the city, both small and great, so that tumors broke out on them. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_10">10&#160;</span>So they sent God’s ark to Ekron. </div>
<div class='p'>As God’s ark came to Ekron, the Ekronites cried out, saying, “They have brought the ark of the God of Israel here to us, to kill us and our people.” 
<span class="verse" id="S15_11">11&#160;</span>They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and they said, “Send the ark of the God of Israel away, and let it go again to its own place, that it not kill us and our people.” For there was a deadly panic throughout all the city. The hand of God was very heavy there. 
<span class="verse" id="S15_12">12&#160;</span>The men who didn’t die were struck with the tumors; and the cry of the city went up to heaven.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S16_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh’s ark was in the country of the Philistines seven months. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_2">2&#160;</span>The Philistines called for the priests and the diviners, saying, “What shall we do with Yahweh’s ark? Show us how we should send it to its place.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_3">3&#160;</span>They said, “If you send away the ark of the God of Israel, don’t send it empty; but by all means return a trespass offering to him. Then you will be healed, and it will be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_4">4&#160;</span>Then they said, “What should the trespass offering be which we shall return to him?” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Five golden tumors and five golden mice, for the number of the lords of the Philistines; for one plague was on you all, and on your lords. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_5">5&#160;</span>Therefore you shall make images of your tumors and images of your mice that mar the land; and you shall give glory to the God of Israel. Perhaps he will release his hand from you, from your gods, and from your land. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_6">6&#160;</span>Why then do you harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When he had worked wonderfully among them, didn’t they let the people go, and they departed? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_7">7&#160;</span>“Now therefore take and prepare yourselves a new cart and two milk cows on which there has come no yoke; and tie the cows to the cart, and bring their calves home from them; 
<span class="verse" id="S16_8">8&#160;</span>and take Yahweh’s ark and lay it on the cart. Put the jewels of gold, which you return him for a trespass offering, in a box by its side; and send it away, that it may go. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, if it goes up by the way of its own border to Beth Shemesh, then he has done us this great evil; but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that struck us. It was a chance that happened to us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_10">10&#160;</span>The men did so, and took two milk cows and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_11">11&#160;</span>They put Yahweh’s ark on the cart, and the box with the golden mice and the images of their tumors. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_12">12&#160;</span>The cows took the straight way by the way to Beth Shemesh. They went along the highway, lowing as they went, and didn’t turn away to the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went after them to the border of Beth Shemesh. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_13">13&#160;</span>The people of Beth Shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley; and they lifted up their eyes and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_14">14&#160;</span>The cart came into the field of Joshua of Beth Shemesh, and stood there, where there was a great stone. Then they split the wood of the cart and offered up the cows for a burnt offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_15">15&#160;</span>The Levites took down Yahweh’s ark and the box that was with it, in which the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone; and the men of Beth Shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_16">16&#160;</span>When the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_17">17&#160;</span>These are the golden tumors which the Philistines returned for a trespass offering to Yahweh: for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; 
<span class="verse" id="S16_18">18&#160;</span>and the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fortified cities and of country villages, even to the great stone on which they set down Yahweh’s ark. That stone remains to this day in the field of Joshua of Beth Shemesh. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_19">19&#160;</span>He struck of the men of Beth Shemesh, because they had looked into Yahweh’s ark, he struck fifty thousand seventy of the men. Then the people mourned, because Yahweh had struck the people with a great slaughter. 
<span class="verse" id="S16_20">20&#160;</span>The men of Beth Shemesh said, “Who is able to stand before Yahweh, this holy God? To whom shall he go up from us?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S16_21">21&#160;</span>They sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath Jearim, saying, “The Philistines have brought back Yahweh’s ark. Come down and bring it up to yourselves.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S17_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_1">1&#160;</span>The men of Kiriath Jearim came and took Yahweh’s ark, and brought it into Abinadab’s house on the hill, and consecrated Eleazar his son to keep Yahweh’s ark. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_2">2&#160;</span>From the day that the ark stayed in Kiriath Jearim, the time was long—for it was twenty years; and all the house of Israel lamented after Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_3">3&#160;</span>Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying, “If you are returning to Yahweh with all your heart, then put away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you, and direct your hearts to Yahweh, and serve him only; and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.” 
<span class="verse" id="S17_4">4&#160;</span>Then the children of Israel removed the Baals and the Ashtaroth, and served Yahweh only. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_5">5&#160;</span>Samuel said, “Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray to Yahweh for you.” 
<span class="verse" id="S17_6">6&#160;</span>They gathered together to Mizpah, and drew water, and poured it out before Yahweh, and fasted on that day, and said there, “We have sinned against Yahweh.” Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_7">7&#160;</span>When the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together at Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. When the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_8">8&#160;</span>The children of Israel said to Samuel, “Don’t stop crying to Yahweh our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.” 
<span class="verse" id="S17_9">9&#160;</span>Samuel took a suckling lamb, and offered it for a whole burnt offering to Yahweh. Samuel cried to Yahweh for Israel, and Yahweh answered him. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_10">10&#160;</span>As Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines came near to battle against Israel; but Yahweh thundered with a great thunder on that day on the Philistines and confused them; and they were struck down before Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_11">11&#160;</span>The men of Israel went out of Mizpah and pursued the Philistines, and struck them until they came under Beth Kar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_12">12&#160;</span>Then Samuel took a stone and set it between Mizpah and Shen, and called its name Ebenezer,<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> saying, “Yahweh helped us until now.” 
<span class="verse" id="S17_13">13&#160;</span>So the Philistines were subdued, and they stopped coming within the border of Israel. Yahweh’s hand was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_14">14&#160;</span>The cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even to Gath; and Israel recovered its border out of the hand of the Philistines. There was peace between Israel and the Amorites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S17_15">15&#160;</span>Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_16">16&#160;</span>He went from year to year in a circuit to Bethel, Gilgal, and Mizpah; and he judged Israel in all those places. 
<span class="verse" id="S17_17">17&#160;</span>His return was to Ramah, for his house was there, and he judged Israel there; and he built an altar to Yahweh there.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S18_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_1">1&#160;</span>When Samuel was old, he made his sons judges over Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_2">2&#160;</span>Now the name of his firstborn was Joel, and the name of his second, Abijah. They were judges in Beersheba. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_3">3&#160;</span>His sons didn’t walk in his ways, but turned away after dishonest gain, took bribes, and perverted justice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_4">4&#160;</span>Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together and came to Samuel to Ramah. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_5">5&#160;</span>They said to him, “Behold, you are old, and your sons don’t walk in your ways. Now make us a king to judge us like all the nations.” 
<span class="verse" id="S18_6">6&#160;</span>But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, “Give us a king to judge us.” </div>
<div class='p'>Samuel prayed to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Samuel, “Listen to the voice of the people in all that they tell you; for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected me as the king over them. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_8">8&#160;</span>According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even to this day, in that they have forsaken me and served other gods, so they also do to you. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_9">9&#160;</span>Now therefore, listen to their voice. However, you shall protest solemnly to them, and shall show them the way of the king who will reign over them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_10">10&#160;</span>Samuel told all Yahweh’s words to the people who asked him for a king. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_11">11&#160;</span>He said, “This will be the way of the king who shall reign over you: he will take your sons and appoint them as his servants, for his chariots and to be his horsemen; and they will run before his chariots. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_12">12&#160;</span>He will appoint them to him for captains of thousands and captains of fifties; and he will assign some to plow his ground and to reap his harvest; and to make his instruments of war and the instruments of his chariots. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_13">13&#160;</span>He will take your daughters to be perfumers, to be cooks, and to be bakers. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_14">14&#160;</span>He will take your fields, your vineyards, and your olive groves, even your best, and give them to his servants. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_15">15&#160;</span>He will take one tenth of your seed and of your vineyards, and give it to his officers and to his servants. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_16">16&#160;</span>He will take your male servants, your female servants, your best young men, and your donkeys, and assign them to his own work. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_17">17&#160;</span>He will take one tenth of your flocks; and you will be his servants. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_18">18&#160;</span>You will cry out in that day because of your king whom you will have chosen for yourselves; and Yahweh will not answer you in that day.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_19">19&#160;</span>But the people refused to listen to the voice of Samuel; and they said, “No, but we will have a king over us, 
<span class="verse" id="S18_20">20&#160;</span>that we also may be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S18_21">21&#160;</span>Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed them in the ears of Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S18_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Samuel, “Listen to their voice, and make them a king.” </div>
<div class='p'>Samuel said to the men of Israel, “Everyone go to your own city.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S19_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_1">1&#160;</span>Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valor. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_2">2&#160;</span>He had a son whose name was Saul, an impressive young man; and there was not among the children of Israel a more handsome person than he. From his shoulders and upward he was taller than any of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_3">3&#160;</span>The donkeys of Kish, Saul’s father, were lost. Kish said to Saul his son, “Now take one of the servants with you, and arise, go look for the donkeys.” 
<span class="verse" id="S19_4">4&#160;</span>He passed through the hill country of Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they didn’t find them. Then they passed through the land of Shaalim, and they weren’t there. Then he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they didn’t find them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_5">5&#160;</span>When they had come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, “Come! Let’s return, lest my father stop caring about the donkeys and be anxious for us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_6">6&#160;</span>The servant said to him, “Behold now, there is a man of God in this city, and he is a man who is held in honor. All that he says surely happens. Now let’s go there. Perhaps he can tell us which way to go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_7">7&#160;</span>Then Saul said to his servant, “But behold, if we go, what should we bring the man? For the bread is spent in our sacks, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God. What do we have?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_8">8&#160;</span>The servant answered Saul again and said, “Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver. I will give that to the man of God, to tell us our way.” 
<span class="verse" id="S19_9">9&#160;</span>(In earlier times in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, he said, “Come! Let’s go to the seer;” for he who is now called a prophet was before called a seer.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_10">10&#160;</span>Then Saul said to his servant, “Well said. Come! Let’s go.” So they went to the city where the man of God was. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_11">11&#160;</span>As they went up the ascent to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said to them, “Is the seer here?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_12">12&#160;</span>They answered them and said, “He is. Behold, he is before you. Hurry now, for he has come today into the city; for the people have a sacrifice today in the high place. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_13">13&#160;</span>As soon as you have come into the city, you will immediately find him before he goes up to the high place to eat; for the people will not eat until he comes, because he blesses the sacrifice. Afterwards those who are invited eat. Now therefore go up; for at this time you will find him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_14">14&#160;</span>They went up to the city. As they came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them to go up to the high place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_15">15&#160;</span>Now Yahweh had revealed to Samuel a day before Saul came, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="S19_16">16&#160;</span>“Tomorrow about this time I will send you a man out of the land of Benjamin, and you shall anoint him to be prince over my people Israel. He will save my people out of the hand of the Philistines; for I have looked upon my people, because their cry has come to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_17">17&#160;</span>When Samuel saw Saul, Yahweh said to him, “Behold, the man of whom I spoke to you! He will have authority over my people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_18">18&#160;</span>Then Saul approached Samuel in the gateway, and said, “Please tell me where the seer’s house is.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_19">19&#160;</span>Samuel answered Saul and said, “I am the seer. Go up before me to the high place, for you are to eat with me today. In the morning I will let you go and will tell you all that is in your heart. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_20">20&#160;</span>As for your donkeys who were lost three days ago, don’t set your mind on them, for they have been found. For whom does all Israel desire? Is it not you and all your father’s house?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_21">21&#160;</span>Saul answered, “Am I not a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then do you speak to me like this?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_22">22&#160;</span>Samuel took Saul and his servant and brought them into the guest room, and made them sit in the best place among those who were invited, who were about thirty persons. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_23">23&#160;</span>Samuel said to the cook, “Bring the portion which I gave you, of which I said to you, ‘Set it aside.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="S19_24">24&#160;</span>The cook took up the thigh, and that which was on it, and set it before Saul. Samuel said, “Behold, that which has been reserved! Set it before yourself and eat; because it has been kept for you for the appointed time, for I said, ‘I have invited the people.’ ” So Saul ate with Samuel that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S19_25">25&#160;</span>When they had come down from the high place into the city, he talked with Saul on the housetop. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_26">26&#160;</span>They arose early; and about daybreak, Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying, “Get up, that I may send you away.” Saul arose, and they both went outside, he and Samuel, together. 
<span class="verse" id="S19_27">27&#160;</span>As they were going down at the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, “Tell the servant to go on ahead of us.” He went ahead, then Samuel said, “But stand still first, that I may cause you to hear God’s message.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S110_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_1">1&#160;</span>Then Samuel took the vial of oil and poured it on his head, then kissed him and said, “Hasn’t Yahweh anointed you to be prince over his inheritance? 
<span class="verse" id="S110_2">2&#160;</span>When you have departed from me today, then you will find two men by Rachel’s tomb, on the border of Benjamin at Zelzah. They will tell you, ‘The donkeys which you went to look for have been found; and behold, your father has stopped caring about the donkeys and is anxious for you, saying, “What shall I do for my son?” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_3">3&#160;</span>“Then you will go on forward from there, and you will come to the oak of Tabor. Three men will meet you there going up to God to Bethel: one carrying three young goats, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a container of wine. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_4">4&#160;</span>They will greet you and give you two loaves of bread, which you shall receive from their hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_5">5&#160;</span>“After that you will come to the hill of God, where the garrison of the Philistines is; and it will happen, when you have come there to the city, that you will meet a band of prophets coming down from the high place with a lute, a tambourine, a pipe, and a harp before them; and they will be prophesying. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_6">6&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s Spirit will come mightily on you, then you will prophesy with them and will be turned into another man. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_7">7&#160;</span>Let it be, when these signs have come to you, that you do what is appropriate for the occasion; for God is with you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_8">8&#160;</span>“Go down ahead of me to Gilgal; and behold, I will come down to you to offer burnt offerings and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings. Wait seven days, until I come to you and show you what you are to do.” 
<span class="verse" id="S110_9">9&#160;</span>It was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart; and all those signs happened that day. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_10">10&#160;</span>When they came there to the hill, behold, a band of prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came mightily on him, and he prophesied among them. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_11">11&#160;</span>When all who knew him before saw that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, then the people said to one another, “What is this that has come to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_12">12&#160;</span>One from the same place answered, “Who is their father?” Therefore it became a proverb, “Is Saul also among the prophets?” 
<span class="verse" id="S110_13">13&#160;</span>When he had finished prophesying, he came to the high place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_14">14&#160;</span>Saul’s uncle said to him and to his servant, “Where did you go?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “To seek the donkeys. When we saw that they were not found, we came to Samuel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_15">15&#160;</span>Saul’s uncle said, “Please tell me what Samuel said to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_16">16&#160;</span>Saul said to his uncle, “He told us plainly that the donkeys were found.” But concerning the matter of the kingdom, of which Samuel spoke, he didn’t tell him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_17">17&#160;</span>Samuel called the people together to Yahweh to Mizpah; 
<span class="verse" id="S110_18">18&#160;</span>and he said to the children of Israel, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says ‘I brought Israel up out of Egypt and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S110_19">19&#160;</span>But you have today rejected your God, who himself saves you out of all your calamities and your distresses; and you have said to him, ‘No! Set a king over us!’ Now therefore present yourselves before Yahweh by your tribes and by your thousands.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_20">20&#160;</span>So Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was chosen. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_21">21&#160;</span>He brought the tribe of Benjamin near by their families and the family of the Matrites was chosen. Then Saul the son of Kish was chosen; but when they looked for him, he could not be found. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_22">22&#160;</span>Therefore they asked of Yahweh further, “Is there yet a man to come here?” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh answered, “Behold, he has hidden himself among the baggage.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_23">23&#160;</span>They ran and got him there. When he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_24">24&#160;</span>Samuel said to all the people, “Do you see him whom Yahweh has chosen, that there is no one like him among all the people?” </div>
<div class='p'>All the people shouted and said, “Long live the king!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S110_25">25&#160;</span>Then Samuel told the people the regulations of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book and laid it up before Yahweh. Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_26">26&#160;</span>Saul also went to his house in Gibeah; and the army went with him, whose hearts God had touched. 
<span class="verse" id="S110_27">27&#160;</span>But certain worthless fellows said, “How could this man save us?” They despised him, and brought him no tribute. But he held his peace.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S111_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_1">1&#160;</span>Then Nahash the Ammonite came up and encamped against Jabesh Gilead; and all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Make a covenant with us, and we will serve you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_2">2&#160;</span>Nahash the Ammonite said to them, “On this condition I will make it with you, that all your right eyes be gouged out. I will make this dishonor all Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_3">3&#160;</span>The elders of Jabesh said to him, “Give us seven days, that we may send messengers to all the borders of Israel; and then, if there is no one to save us, we will come out to you.” 
<span class="verse" id="S111_4">4&#160;</span>Then the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul, and spoke these words in the ears of the people, then all the people lifted up their voice and wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, Saul came following the oxen out of the field; and Saul said, “What ails the people that they weep?” They told him the words of the men of Jabesh. 
<span class="verse" id="S111_6">6&#160;</span>God’s Spirit came mightily on Saul when he heard those words, and his anger burned hot. 
<span class="verse" id="S111_7">7&#160;</span>He took a yoke of oxen and cut them in pieces, then sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, “Whoever doesn’t come out after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen.” The dread of Yahweh fell on the people, and they came out as one man. 
<span class="verse" id="S111_8">8&#160;</span>He counted them in Bezek; and the children of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="S111_9">9&#160;</span>They said to the messengers who came, “Tell the men of Jabesh Gilead, ‘Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, you will be rescued.’ ” The messengers came and told the men of Jabesh; and they were glad. 
<span class="verse" id="S111_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore the men of Jabesh said, “Tomorrow we will come out to you, and you shall do with us all that seems good to you.” 
<span class="verse" id="S111_11">11&#160;</span>On the next day, Saul put the people in three companies; and they came into the middle of the camp in the morning watch, and struck the Ammonites until the heat of the day. Those who remained were scattered, so that no two of them were left together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_12">12&#160;</span>The people said to Samuel, “Who is he who said, ‘Shall Saul reign over us?’ Bring those men, that we may put them to death!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_13">13&#160;</span>Saul said, “No man shall be put to death today; for today Yahweh has rescued Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S111_14">14&#160;</span>Then Samuel said to the people, “Come! Let’s go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.” 
<span class="verse" id="S111_15">15&#160;</span>All the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king before Yahweh in Gilgal. There they offered sacrifices of peace offerings before Yahweh; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S112_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_1">1&#160;</span>Samuel said to all Israel, “Behold, I have listened to your voice in all that you said to me, and have made a king over you. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_2">2&#160;</span>Now, behold, the king walks before you. I am old and gray-headed. Behold, my sons are with you. I have walked before you from my youth to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_3">3&#160;</span>Here I am. Witness against me before Yahweh and before his anointed. Whose ox have I taken? Whose donkey have I taken? Whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Of whose hand have I taken a bribe to make me blind my eyes? I will restore it to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_4">4&#160;</span>They said, “You have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have you taken anything from anyone’s hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_5">5&#160;</span>He said to them, “Yahweh is witness against you, and his anointed is witness today, that you have not found anything in my hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “He is witness.” 
<span class="verse" id="S112_6">6&#160;</span>Samuel said to the people, “It is Yahweh who appointed Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_7">7&#160;</span>Now therefore stand still, that I may plead with you before Yahweh concerning all the righteous acts of Yahweh, which he did to you and to your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_8">8&#160;</span>“When Jacob had come into Egypt, and your fathers cried to Yahweh, then Yahweh sent Moses and Aaron, who brought your fathers out of Egypt, and made them to dwell in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_9">9&#160;</span>But they forgot Yahweh their God; and he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the army of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab; and they fought against them. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_10">10&#160;</span>They cried to Yahweh, and said, ‘We have sinned, because we have forsaken Yahweh and have served the Baals and the Ashtaroth; but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve you.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S112_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh sent Jerubbaal, Bedan, Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side; and you lived in safety. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_12">12&#160;</span>“When you saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, you said to me, ‘No, but a king shall reign over us,’ when Yahweh your God was your king. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_13">13&#160;</span>Now therefore see the king whom you have chosen and whom you have asked for. Behold, Yahweh has set a king over you. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_14">14&#160;</span>If you will fear Yahweh, and serve him, and listen to his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of Yahweh, then both you and also the king who reigns over you are followers of Yahweh your God. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_15">15&#160;</span>But if you will not listen to Yahweh’s voice, but rebel against the commandment of Yahweh, then Yahweh’s hand will be against you, as it was against your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_16">16&#160;</span>“Now therefore stand still and see this great thing, which Yahweh will do before your eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_17">17&#160;</span>Isn’t it wheat harvest today? I will call to Yahweh, that he may send thunder and rain; and you will know and see that your wickedness is great, which you have done in Yahweh’s sight, in asking for a king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_18">18&#160;</span>So Samuel called to Yahweh, and Yahweh sent thunder and rain that day. Then all the people greatly feared Yahweh and Samuel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_19">19&#160;</span>All the people said to Samuel, “Pray for your servants to Yahweh your God, that we not die; for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask for a king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S112_20">20&#160;</span>Samuel said to the people, “Don’t be afraid. You have indeed done all this evil; yet don’t turn away from following Yahweh, but serve Yahweh with all your heart. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t turn away to go after vain things which can’t profit or deliver, for they are vain. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_22">22&#160;</span>For Yahweh will not forsake his people for his great name’s sake, because it has pleased Yahweh to make you a people for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_23">23&#160;</span>Moreover, as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against Yahweh in ceasing to pray for you; but I will instruct you in the good and the right way. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_24">24&#160;</span>Only fear Yahweh, and serve him in truth with all your heart; for consider what great things he has done for you. 
<span class="verse" id="S112_25">25&#160;</span>But if you keep doing evil, you will be consumed, both you and your king.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S113_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_1">1&#160;</span>Saul was thirty years old when he became king, and he reigned over Israel forty-two years.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_2">2&#160;</span>Saul chose for himself three thousand men of Israel, of which two thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in the Mount of Bethel, and one thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin. He sent the rest of the people to their own tents. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_3">3&#160;</span>Jonathan struck the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, “Let the Hebrews hear!” 
<span class="verse" id="S113_4">4&#160;</span>All Israel heard that Saul had struck the garrison of the Philistines, and also that Israel was considered an abomination to the Philistines. The people were gathered together after Saul to Gilgal. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_5">5&#160;</span>The Philistines assembled themselves together to fight with Israel: thirty thousand chariots, six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the seashore in multitude. They came up and encamped in Michmash, eastward of Beth Aven. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_6">6&#160;</span>When the men of Israel saw that they were in trouble (for the people were distressed), then the people hid themselves in caves, in thickets, in rocks, in tombs, and in pits. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_7">7&#160;</span>Now some of the Hebrews had gone over the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead; but as for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_8">8&#160;</span>He stayed seven days, according to the time set by Samuel; but Samuel didn’t come to Gilgal, and the people were scattering from him. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_9">9&#160;</span>Saul said, “Bring the burnt offering to me here, and the peace offerings.” He offered the burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_10">10&#160;</span>It came to pass that as soon as he had finished offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to meet him, that he might greet him. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_11">11&#160;</span>Samuel said, “What have you done?” </div>
<div class='p'>Saul said, “Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that you didn’t come within the days appointed, and that the Philistines assembled themselves together at Michmash, 
<span class="verse" id="S113_12">12&#160;</span>therefore I said, ‘Now the Philistines will come down on me to Gilgal, and I haven’t entreated the favor of Yahweh.’ I forced myself therefore, and offered the burnt offering.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_13">13&#160;</span>Samuel said to Saul, “You have done foolishly. You have not kept the commandment of Yahweh your God, which he commanded you; for now Yahweh would have established your kingdom on Israel forever. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_14">14&#160;</span>But now your kingdom will not continue. Yahweh has sought for himself a man after his own heart, and Yahweh has appointed him to be prince over his people, because you have not kept that which Yahweh commanded you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_15">15&#160;</span>Samuel arose, and went from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin. Saul counted the people who were present with him, about six hundred men. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_16">16&#160;</span>Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people who were present with them, stayed in Geba of Benjamin; but the Philistines encamped in Michmash. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_17">17&#160;</span>The raiders came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies: one company turned to the way that leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shual; 
<span class="verse" id="S113_18">18&#160;</span>another company turned the way to Beth Horon; and another company turned the way of the border that looks down on the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_19">19&#160;</span>Now there was no blacksmith found throughout all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, “Lest the Hebrews make themselves swords or spears”; 
<span class="verse" id="S113_20">20&#160;</span>but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, each man to sharpen his own plowshare, mattock, ax, and sickle. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_21">21&#160;</span>The price was one payim<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> each to sharpen mattocks, plowshares, pitchforks, axes, and goads. 
<span class="verse" id="S113_22">22&#160;</span>So it came to pass in the day of battle that neither sword nor spear was found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan; but Saul and Jonathan his son had them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S113_23">23&#160;</span>The garrison of the Philistines went out to the pass of Michmash.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S114_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_1">1&#160;</span>Now it happened on a day that Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man who bore his armor, “Come! Let’s go over to the Philistines’ garrison that is on the other side.” But he didn’t tell his father. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_2">2&#160;</span>Saul stayed in the uttermost part of Gibeah under the pomegranate tree which is in Migron; and the people who were with him were about six hundred men, 
<span class="verse" id="S114_3">3&#160;</span>including Ahijah the son of Ahitub, Ichabod’s brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli the priest of Yahweh in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. The people didn’t know that Jonathan was gone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_4">4&#160;</span>Between the passes, by which Jonathan sought to go over to the Philistines’ garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side and a rocky crag on the other side; and the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_5">5&#160;</span>The one crag rose up on the north in front of Michmash, and the other on the south in front of Geba. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_6">6&#160;</span>Jonathan said to the young man who bore his armor, “Come! Let’s go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised. It may be that Yahweh will work for us, for there is no restraint on Yahweh to save by many or by few.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_7">7&#160;</span>His armor bearer said to him, “Do all that is in your heart. Go, and behold, I am with you according to your heart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_8">8&#160;</span>Then Jonathan said, “Behold, we will pass over to the men, and we will reveal ourselves to them. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_9">9&#160;</span>If they say this to us, ‘Wait until we come to you!’ then we will stand still in our place and will not go up to them. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_10">10&#160;</span>But if they say this, ‘Come up to us!’ then we will go up, for Yahweh has delivered them into our hand. This shall be the sign to us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_11">11&#160;</span>Both of them revealed themselves to the garrison of the Philistines; and the Philistines said, “Behold, the Hebrews are coming out of the holes where they had hidden themselves!” 
<span class="verse" id="S114_12">12&#160;</span>The men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armor bearer, and said, “Come up to us, and we will show you something!” </div>
<div class='p'>Jonathan said to his armor bearer, “Come up after me, for Yahweh has delivered them into the hand of Israel.” 
<span class="verse" id="S114_13">13&#160;</span>Jonathan climbed up on his hands and on his feet, and his armor bearer after him, and they fell before Jonathan; and his armor bearer killed them after him. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_14">14&#160;</span>That first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armor bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half a furrow’s length in an acre of land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_15">15&#160;</span>There was a trembling in the camp, in the field, and among all the people; the garrison and the raiders also trembled; and the earth quaked, so there was an exceedingly great trembling. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_16">16&#160;</span>The watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and behold, the multitude melted away and scattered. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_17">17&#160;</span>Then Saul said to the people who were with him, “Count now, and see who is missing from us.” When they had counted, behold, Jonathan and his armor bearer were not there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_18">18&#160;</span>Saul said to Ahijah, “Bring God’s ark here.” For God’s ark was with the children of Israel at that time. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_19">19&#160;</span>While Saul talked to the priest, the tumult that was in the camp of the Philistines went on and increased; and Saul said to the priest, “Withdraw your hand!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_20">20&#160;</span>Saul and all the people who were with him were gathered together, and came to the battle; and behold, they were all striking each other with their swords in very great confusion. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_21">21&#160;</span>Now the Hebrews who were with the Philistines before and who went up with them into the camp from all around, even they also turned to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_22">22&#160;</span>Likewise all the men of Israel who had hidden themselves in the hill country of Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed hard after them in the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_23">23&#160;</span>So Yahweh saved Israel that day; and the battle passed over by Beth Aven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_24">24&#160;</span>The men of Israel were distressed that day; for Saul had adjured the people, saying, “Cursed is the man who eats any food until it is evening, and I am avenged of my enemies.” So none of the people tasted food. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_25">25&#160;</span>All the people came into the forest; and there was honey on the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_26">26&#160;</span>When the people had come to the forest, behold, honey was dripping, but no one put his hand to his mouth, for the people feared the oath. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_27">27&#160;</span>But Jonathan didn’t hear when his father commanded the people with the oath. Therefore he put out the end of the rod that was in his hand and dipped it in the honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth; and his eyes brightened. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_28">28&#160;</span>Then one of the people answered, and said, “Your father directly commanded the people with an oath, saying, ‘Cursed is the man who eats food today.’ ” So the people were faint. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_29">29&#160;</span>Then Jonathan said, “My father has troubled the land. Please look how my eyes have brightened because I tasted a little of this honey. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_30">30&#160;</span>How much more, if perhaps the people had eaten freely today of the plunder of their enemies which they found? For now there has been no great slaughter among the Philistines.” 
<span class="verse" id="S114_31">31&#160;</span>They struck the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon. The people were very faint; 
<span class="verse" id="S114_32">32&#160;</span>and the people pounced on the plunder, and took sheep, cattle, and calves, and killed them on the ground; and the people ate them with the blood. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_33">33&#160;</span>Then they told Saul, saying, “Behold, the people are sinning against Yahweh, in that they eat meat with the blood.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “You have dealt treacherously. Roll a large stone to me today!” 
<span class="verse" id="S114_34">34&#160;</span>Saul said, “Disperse yourselves among the people, and tell them, ‘Every man bring me here his ox, and every man his sheep, and kill them here, and eat; and don’t sin against Yahweh in eating meat with the blood.’ ” All the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and killed them there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_35">35&#160;</span>Saul built an altar to Yahweh. This was the first altar that he built to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_36">36&#160;</span>Saul said, “Let’s go down after the Philistines by night, and take plunder among them until the morning light. Let’s not leave a man of them.” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Do whatever seems good to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then the priest said, “Let’s draw near here to God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_37">37&#160;</span>Saul asked counsel of God: “Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will you deliver them into the hand of Israel?” But he didn’t answer him that day. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_38">38&#160;</span>Saul said, “Draw near here, all you chiefs of the people, and know and see in whom this sin has been today. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_39">39&#160;</span>For as Yahweh lives, who saves Israel, though it is in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die.” But there was not a man among all the people who answered him. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_40">40&#160;</span>Then he said to all Israel, “You be on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side.” </div>
<div class='p'>The people said to Saul, “Do what seems good to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_41">41&#160;</span>Therefore Saul said to Yahweh, the God of Israel, “Show the right.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jonathan and Saul were chosen, but the people escaped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_42">42&#160;</span>Saul said, “Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jonathan was selected. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_43">43&#160;</span>Then Saul said to Jonathan, “Tell me what you have done!” </div>
<div class='p'>Jonathan told him, and said, “I certainly did taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my hand; and behold, I must die.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_44">44&#160;</span>Saul said, “God do so and more also; for you shall surely die, Jonathan.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_45">45&#160;</span>The people said to Saul, “Shall Jonathan die, who has worked this great salvation in Israel? Far from it! As Yahweh lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has worked with God today!” So the people rescued Jonathan, so he didn’t die. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_46">46&#160;</span>Then Saul went up from following the Philistines; and the Philistines went to their own place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_47">47&#160;</span>Now when Saul had taken the kingdom over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side: against Moab, and against the children of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines. Wherever he turned himself, he defeated them. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_48">48&#160;</span>He did valiantly and struck the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of those who plundered them. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_49">49&#160;</span>Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, Ishvi, and Malchishua; and the names of his two daughters were these: the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_50">50&#160;</span>The name of Saul’s wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. The name of the captain of his army was Abner the son of Ner, Saul’s uncle. 
<span class="verse" id="S114_51">51&#160;</span>Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S114_52">52&#160;</span>There was severe war against the Philistines all the days of Saul; and when Saul saw any mighty man or any valiant man, he took him into his service.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S115_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_1">1&#160;</span>Samuel said to Saul, “Yahweh sent me to anoint you to be king over his people, over Israel. Now therefore listen to the voice of Yahweh’s words. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says, ‘I remember what Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him on the way when he came up out of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_3">3&#160;</span>Now go and strike Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and don’t spare them; but kill both man and woman, infant and nursing baby, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_4">4&#160;</span>Saul summoned the people, and counted them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen and ten thousand men of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_5">5&#160;</span>Saul came to the city of Amalek, and set an ambush in the valley. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_6">6&#160;</span>Saul said to the Kenites, “Go, depart, go down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them; for you showed kindness to all the children of Israel when they came up out of Egypt.” So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_7">7&#160;</span>Saul struck the Amalekites, from Havilah as you go to Shur, which is before Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_8">8&#160;</span>He took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_9">9&#160;</span>But Saul and the people spared Agag and the best of the sheep, of the cattle, of the fat calves, of the lambs, and all that was good, and were not willing to utterly destroy them; but everything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_10">10&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Samuel, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="S115_11">11&#160;</span>“It grieves me that I have set up Saul to be king, for he has turned back from following me, and has not performed my commandments.” Samuel was angry; and he cried to Yahweh all night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_12">12&#160;</span>Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning; and Samuel was told, saying, “Saul came to Carmel, and behold, he set up a monument for himself, turned, passed on, and went down to Gilgal.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_13">13&#160;</span>Samuel came to Saul; and Saul said to him, “You are blessed by Yahweh! I have performed the commandment of Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_14">14&#160;</span>Samuel said, “Then what does this bleating of the sheep in my ears and the lowing of the cattle which I hear mean?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_15">15&#160;</span>Saul said, “They have brought them from the Amalekites; for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the cattle, to sacrifice to Yahweh your God. We have utterly destroyed the rest.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_16">16&#160;</span>Then Samuel said to Saul, “Stay, and I will tell you what Yahweh said to me last night.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, “Say on.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_17">17&#160;</span>Samuel said, “Though you were little in your own sight, weren’t you made the head of the tribes of Israel? Yahweh anointed you king over Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="S115_18">18&#160;</span>and Yahweh sent you on a journey, and said, ‘Go, and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight against them until they are consumed.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S115_19">19&#160;</span>Why then didn’t you obey Yahweh’s voice, but took the plunder, and did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_20">20&#160;</span>Saul said to Samuel, “But I have obeyed Yahweh’s voice, and have gone the way which Yahweh sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_21">21&#160;</span>But the people took of the plunder, sheep and cattle, the best of the devoted things, to sacrifice to Yahweh your God in Gilgal.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_22">22&#160;</span>Samuel said, “Has Yahweh as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying Yahweh’s voice? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to listen than the fat of rams. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_23">23&#160;</span>For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Because you have rejected Yahweh’s word, he has also rejected you from being king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_24">24&#160;</span>Saul said to Samuel, “I have sinned; for I have transgressed the commandment of Yahweh and your words, because I feared the people and obeyed their voice. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_25">25&#160;</span>Now therefore, please pardon my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_26">26&#160;</span>Samuel said to Saul, “I will not return with you; for you have rejected Yahweh’s word, and Yahweh has rejected you from being king over Israel.” 
<span class="verse" id="S115_27">27&#160;</span>As Samuel turned around to go away, Saul grabbed the skirt of his robe, and it tore. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_28">28&#160;</span>Samuel said to him, “Yahweh has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today, and has given it to a neighbor of yours who is better than you. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_29">29&#160;</span>Also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent; for he is not a man, that he should repent.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_30">30&#160;</span>Then he said, “I have sinned; yet please honor me now before the elders of my people and before Israel, and come back with me, that I may worship Yahweh your God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_31">31&#160;</span>So Samuel went back with Saul; and Saul worshiped Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_32">32&#160;</span>Then Samuel said, “Bring Agag the king of the Amalekites here to me!” </div>
<div class='p'>Agag came to him cheerfully. Agag said, “Surely the bitterness of death is past.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_33">33&#160;</span>Samuel said, “As your sword has made women childless, so your mother will be childless among women!” Then Samuel cut Agag in pieces before Yahweh in Gilgal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S115_34">34&#160;</span>Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S115_35">35&#160;</span>Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death, but Samuel mourned for Saul. Yahweh grieved that he had made Saul king over Israel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S116_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Samuel, “How long will you mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil, and go. I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided a king for myself among his sons.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_2">2&#160;</span>Samuel said, “How can I go? If Saul hears it, he will kill me.” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh said, “Take a heifer with you, and say, ‘I have come to sacrifice to Yahweh.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S116_3">3&#160;</span>Call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you shall do. You shall anoint to me him whom I name to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_4">4&#160;</span>Samuel did that which Yahweh spoke, and came to Bethlehem. The elders of the city came to meet him trembling, and said, “Do you come peaceably?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_5">5&#160;</span>He said, “Peaceably; I have come to sacrifice to Yahweh. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice.” He sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_6">6&#160;</span>When they had come, he looked at Eliab, and said, “Surely Yahweh’s anointed is before him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_7">7&#160;</span>But Yahweh said to Samuel, “Don’t look on his face, or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected him; for I don’t see as man sees. For man looks at the outward appearance, but Yahweh looks at the heart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_8">8&#160;</span>Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. He said, “Yahweh has not chosen this one, either.” 
<span class="verse" id="S116_9">9&#160;</span>Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. He said, “Yahweh has not chosen this one, either.” 
<span class="verse" id="S116_10">10&#160;</span>Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. Samuel said to Jesse, “Yahweh has not chosen these.” 
<span class="verse" id="S116_11">11&#160;</span>Samuel said to Jesse, “Are all your children here?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “There remains yet the youngest. Behold, he is keeping the sheep.” </div>
<div class='p'>Samuel said to Jesse, “Send and get him, for we will not sit down until he comes here.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_12">12&#160;</span>He sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with a handsome face and good appearance. Yahweh said, “Arise! Anoint him, for this is he.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_13">13&#160;</span>Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the middle of his brothers. Then Yahweh’s Spirit came mightily on David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up and went to Ramah. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_14">14&#160;</span>Now Yahweh’s Spirit departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from Yahweh troubled him. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_15">15&#160;</span>Saul’s servants said to him, “See now, an evil spirit from God troubles you. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_16">16&#160;</span>Let our lord now command your servants who are in front of you to seek out a man who is a skillful player on the harp. Then when the evil spirit from God is on you, he will play with his hand, and you will be well.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_17">17&#160;</span>Saul said to his servants, “Provide me now a man who can play well, and bring him to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_18">18&#160;</span>Then one of the young men answered and said, “Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite who is skillful in playing, a mighty man of valor, a man of war, prudent in speech, and a handsome person; and Yahweh is with him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse, and said, “Send me David your son, who is with the sheep.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S116_20">20&#160;</span>Jesse took a donkey loaded with bread, a container of wine, and a young goat, and sent them by David his son to Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_21">21&#160;</span>David came to Saul and stood before him. He loved him greatly; and he became his armor bearer. 
<span class="verse" id="S116_22">22&#160;</span>Saul sent to Jesse, saying, “Please let David stand before me, for he has found favor in my sight.” 
<span class="verse" id="S116_23">23&#160;</span>When the spirit from God was on Saul, David took the harp and played with his hand; so Saul was refreshed and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S117_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_1">1&#160;</span>Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle; and they were gathered together at Socoh, which belongs to Judah, and encamped between Socoh and Azekah in Ephesdammim. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_2">2&#160;</span>Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and encamped in the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_3">3&#160;</span>The Philistines stood on the mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side: and there was a valley between them. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_4">4&#160;</span>A champion out of the camp of the Philistines named Goliath of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> went out. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_5">5&#160;</span>He had a helmet of bronze on his head, and he wore a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_6">6&#160;</span>He had bronze shin armor on his legs and a bronze javelin between his shoulders. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_7">7&#160;</span>The staff of his spear was like a weaver’s beam; and his spear’s head weighed six hundred shekels of iron.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> His shield bearer went before him. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_8">8&#160;</span>He stood and cried to the armies of Israel, and said to them, “Why have you come out to set your battle in array? Am I not a Philistine, and you servants to Saul? Choose a man for yourselves, and let him come down to me. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_9">9&#160;</span>If he is able to fight with me and kill me, then will we be your servants; but if I prevail against him and kill him, then you will be our servants and serve us.” 
<span class="verse" id="S117_10">10&#160;</span>The Philistine said, “I defy the armies of Israel today! Give me a man, that we may fight together!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_11">11&#160;</span>When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed and greatly afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_12">12&#160;</span>Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehem Judah, whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons. The man was an elderly old man in the days of Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_13">13&#160;</span>The three oldest sons of Jesse had gone after Saul to the battle; and the names of his three sons who went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next to him Abinadab, and the third Shammah. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_14">14&#160;</span>David was the youngest; and the three oldest followed Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_15">15&#160;</span>Now David went back and forth from Saul to feed his father’s sheep at Bethlehem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_16">16&#160;</span>The Philistine came near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_17">17&#160;</span>Jesse said to David his son, “Now take for your brothers an ephah<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of this parched grain and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp to your brothers; 
<span class="verse" id="S117_18">18&#160;</span>and bring these ten cheeses to the captain of their thousand; and see how your brothers are doing, and bring back news.” 
<span class="verse" id="S117_19">19&#160;</span>Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_20">20&#160;</span>David rose up early in the morning and left the sheep with a keeper, and took the provisions and went, as Jesse had commanded him. He came to the place of the wagons as the army which was going out to the fight shouted for the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_21">21&#160;</span>Israel and the Philistines put the battle in array, army against army. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_22">22&#160;</span>David left his baggage in the hand of the keeper of the baggage and ran to the army, and came and greeted his brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_23">23&#160;</span>As he talked with them, behold, the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, came up out of the ranks of the Philistines, and said the same words; and David heard them. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_24">24&#160;</span>All the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him and were terrified. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_25">25&#160;</span>The men of Israel said, “Have you seen this man who has come up? He has surely come up to defy Israel. The king will give great riches to the man who kills him, and will give him his daughter, and will make his father’s house tax-free in Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_26">26&#160;</span>David spoke to the men who stood by him, saying, “What shall be done to the man who kills this Philistine and takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_27">27&#160;</span>The people answered him in this way, saying, “So shall it be done to the man who kills him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_28">28&#160;</span>Eliab his oldest brother heard when he spoke to the men; and Eliab’s anger burned against David, and he said, “Why have you come down? With whom have you left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know your pride and the evil of your heart; for you have come down that you might see the battle.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_29">29&#160;</span>David said, “What have I now done? Is there not a cause?” 
<span class="verse" id="S117_30">30&#160;</span>He turned away from him toward another, and spoke like that again; and the people answered him again the same way. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_31">31&#160;</span>When the words were heard which David spoke, they rehearsed them before Saul; and he sent for him. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_32">32&#160;</span>David said to Saul, “Let no man’s heart fail because of him. Your servant will go and fight with this Philistine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_33">33&#160;</span>Saul said to David, “You are not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him; for you are but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_34">34&#160;</span>David said to Saul, “Your servant was keeping his father’s sheep; and when a lion or a bear came and took a lamb out of the flock, 
<span class="verse" id="S117_35">35&#160;</span>I went out after him, struck him, and rescued it out of his mouth. When he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, struck him, and killed him. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_36">36&#160;</span>Your servant struck both the lion and the bear. This uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, since he has defied the armies of the living God.” 
<span class="verse" id="S117_37">37&#160;</span>David said, “Yahweh, who delivered me out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw of the bear, will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine.” </div>
<div class='p'>Saul said to David, “Go! Yahweh will be with you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_38">38&#160;</span>Saul dressed David with his clothing. He put a helmet of bronze on his head, and he clad him with a coat of mail. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_39">39&#160;</span>David strapped his sword on his clothing and he tried to move, for he had not tested it. David said to Saul, “I can’t go with these, for I have not tested them.” Then David took them off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_40">40&#160;</span>He took his staff in his hand, and chose for himself five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in the pouch of his shepherd’s bag which he had. His sling was in his hand; and he came near to the Philistine. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_41">41&#160;</span>The Philistine walked and came near to David; and the man who bore the shield went before him. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_42">42&#160;</span>When the Philistine looked around and saw David, he disdained him; for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and had a good looking face. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_43">43&#160;</span>The Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog, that you come to me with sticks?” The Philistine cursed David by his gods. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_44">44&#160;</span>The Philistine said to David, “Come to me, and I will give your flesh to the birds of the sky and to the animals of the field.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_45">45&#160;</span>Then David said to the Philistine, “You come to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a javelin; but I come to you in the name of Yahweh of Armies, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_46">46&#160;</span>Today, Yahweh will deliver you into my hand. I will strike you and take your head from off you. I will give the dead bodies of the army of the Philistines today to the birds of the sky and to the wild animals of the earth, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="S117_47">47&#160;</span>and that all this assembly may know that Yahweh doesn’t save with sword and spear; for the battle is Yahweh’s, and he will give you into our hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_48">48&#160;</span>When the Philistine arose, and walked and came near to meet David, David hurried and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_49">49&#160;</span>David put his hand in his bag, took a stone and slung it, and struck the Philistine in his forehead. The stone sank into his forehead, and he fell on his face to the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_50">50&#160;</span>So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and struck the Philistine and killed him; but there was no sword David’s hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_51">51&#160;</span>Then David ran, stood over the Philistine, took his sword, drew it out of its sheath, killed him, and cut off his head with it. </div>
<div class='p'>When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_52">52&#160;</span>The men of Israel and of Judah arose and shouted, and pursued the Philistines as far as Gai and to the gates of Ekron. The wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even to Gath and to Ekron. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_53">53&#160;</span>The children of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they plundered their camp. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_54">54&#160;</span>David took the head of the Philistine and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his armor in his tent. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_55">55&#160;</span>When Saul saw David go out against the Philistine, he said to Abner, the captain of the army, “Abner, whose son is this youth?” </div>
<div class='p'>Abner said, “As your soul lives, O king, I can’t tell.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_56">56&#160;</span>The king said, “Inquire whose son the young man is!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S117_57">57&#160;</span>As David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S117_58">58&#160;</span>Saul said to him, “Whose son are you, you young man?” </div>
<div class='p'>David answered, “I am the son of your servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S118_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_1">1&#160;</span>When he had finished speaking to Saul, the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_2">2&#160;</span>Saul took him that day, and wouldn’t let him go home to his father’s house any more. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_3">3&#160;</span>Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_4">4&#160;</span>Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was on him and gave it to David with his clothing, even including his sword, his bow, and his sash. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_5">5&#160;</span>David went out wherever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely; and Saul set him over the men of war. It was good in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul’s servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_6">6&#160;</span>As they came, when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul with tambourines, with joy, and with instruments of music. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_7">7&#160;</span>The women sang to one another as they played, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>“Saul has slain his thousands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and David his ten thousands.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_8">8&#160;</span>Saul was very angry, and this saying displeased him. He said, “They have credited David with ten thousands, and they have only credited me with thousands. What can he have more but the kingdom?” 
<span class="verse" id="S118_9">9&#160;</span>Saul watched David from that day and forward. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_10">10&#160;</span>On the next day, an evil spirit from God came mightily on Saul, and he prophesied in the middle of the house. David played with his hand, as he did day by day. Saul had his spear in his hand; 
<span class="verse" id="S118_11">11&#160;</span>and Saul threw the spear, for he said, “I will pin David to the wall!” David escaped from his presence twice. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_12">12&#160;</span>Saul was afraid of David, because Yahweh was with him, and had departed from Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore Saul removed him from his presence, and made him his captain over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_14">14&#160;</span>David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and Yahweh was with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_15">15&#160;</span>When Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he stood in awe of him. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_16">16&#160;</span>But all Israel and Judah loved David; for he went out and came in before them. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_17">17&#160;</span>Saul said to David, “Behold, my elder daughter Merab. I will give her to you as wife. Only be valiant for me, and fight Yahweh’s battles.” For Saul said, “Don’t let my hand be on him, but let the hand of the Philistines be on him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_18">18&#160;</span>David said to Saul, “Who am I, and what is my life, or my father’s family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to the king?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_19">19&#160;</span>But at the time when Merab, Saul’s daughter, should have been given to David, she was given to Adriel the Meholathite as wife. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_20">20&#160;</span>Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved David; and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_21">21&#160;</span>Saul said, I will give her to him, that she may be a snare to him and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Therefore Saul said to David a second time, “You shall today be my son-in-law.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_22">22&#160;</span>Saul commanded his servants, “Talk with David secretly, and say, ‘Behold, the king has delight in you, and all his servants love you. Now therefore be the king’s son-in-law.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_23">23&#160;</span>Saul’s servants spoke those words in the ears of David. David said, “Does it seem to you a light thing to be the king’s son-in-law, since I am a poor man and little known?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_24">24&#160;</span>The servants of Saul told him, saying, “David spoke like this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_25">25&#160;</span>Saul said, “Tell David, ‘The king desires no dowry except one hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king’s enemies.’ ” Now Saul thought he would make David fall by the hand of the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_26">26&#160;</span>When his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king’s son-in-law. Before the deadline, 
<span class="verse" id="S118_27">27&#160;</span>David arose and went, he and his men, and killed two hundred men of the Philistines. Then David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full number to the king, that he might be the king’s son-in-law. Then Saul gave him Michal his daughter as wife. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_28">28&#160;</span>Saul saw and knew that Yahweh was with David; and Michal, Saul’s daughter, loved him. 
<span class="verse" id="S118_29">29&#160;</span>Saul was even more afraid of David; and Saul was David’s enemy continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S118_30">30&#160;</span>Then the princes of the Philistines went out; and as often as they went out, David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul, so that his name was highly esteemed.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S119_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_1">1&#160;</span>Saul spoke to Jonathan his son and to all his servants, that they should kill David. But Jonathan, Saul’s son, greatly delighted in David. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_2">2&#160;</span>Jonathan told David, saying, “Saul my father seeks to kill you. Now therefore, please take care of yourself in the morning, live in a secret place, and hide yourself. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_3">3&#160;</span>I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where you are, and I will talk with my father about you; and if I see anything, I will tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_4">4&#160;</span>Jonathan spoke good of David to Saul his father, and said to him, “Don’t let the king sin against his servant, against David; because he has not sinned against you, and because his works have been very good toward you; 
<span class="verse" id="S119_5">5&#160;</span>for he put his life in his hand and struck the Philistine, and Yahweh worked a great victory for all Israel. You saw it and rejoiced. Why then will you sin against innocent blood, to kill David without a cause?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_6">6&#160;</span>Saul listened to the voice of Jonathan; and Saul swore, “As Yahweh lives, he shall not be put to death.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_7">7&#160;</span>Jonathan called David, and Jonathan showed him all those things. Then Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence as before. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_8">8&#160;</span>There was war again. David went out and fought with the Philistines, and killed them with a great slaughter; and they fled before him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_9">9&#160;</span>An evil spirit from Yahweh was on Saul as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand; and David was playing music with his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_10">10&#160;</span>Saul sought to pin David to the wall with the spear, but he slipped away out of Saul’s presence; and he stuck the spear into the wall. David fled and escaped that night. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_11">11&#160;</span>Saul sent messengers to David’s house to watch him and to kill him in the morning. Michal, David’s wife, told him, saying, “If you don’t save your life tonight, tomorrow you will be killed.” 
<span class="verse" id="S119_12">12&#160;</span>So Michal let David down through the window. He went away, fled, and escaped. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_13">13&#160;</span>Michal took the teraphim<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats’ hair at its head and covered it with clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_14">14&#160;</span>When Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, “He is sick.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_15">15&#160;</span>Saul sent the messengers to see David, saying, “Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may kill him.” 
<span class="verse" id="S119_16">16&#160;</span>When the messengers came in, behold, the teraphim was in the bed, with the pillow of goats’ hair at its head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_17">17&#160;</span>Saul said to Michal, “Why have you deceived me like this and let my enemy go, so that he has escaped?” </div>
<div class='p'>Michal answered Saul, “He said to me, ‘Let me go! Why should I kill you?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_18">18&#160;</span>Now David fled and escaped, and came to Samuel at Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. He and Samuel went and lived in Naioth. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_19">19&#160;</span>Saul was told, saying, “Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_20">20&#160;</span>Saul sent messengers to seize David; and when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as head over them, God’s Spirit came on Saul’s messengers, and they also prophesied. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_21">21&#160;</span>When Saul was told, he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied. Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they also prophesied. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_22">22&#160;</span>Then he also went to Ramah, and came to the great well that is in Secu: and he asked, “Where are Samuel and David?” </div>
<div class='p'>One said, “Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S119_23">23&#160;</span>He went there to Naioth in Ramah. Then God’s Spirit came on him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah. 
<span class="verse" id="S119_24">24&#160;</span>He also stripped off his clothes. He also prophesied before Samuel and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Therefore they say, “Is Saul also among the prophets?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S120_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_1">1&#160;</span>David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said to Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my iniquity? What is my sin before your father, that he seeks my life?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_2">2&#160;</span>He said to him, “Far from it; you will not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small, but that he discloses it to me. Why would my father hide this thing from me? It is not so.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_3">3&#160;</span>David swore moreover, and said, “Your father knows well that I have found favor in your eyes; and he says, ‘Don’t let Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved;’ but truly as Yahweh lives, and as your soul lives, there is but a step between me and death.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_4">4&#160;</span>Then Jonathan said to David, “Whatever your soul desires, I will even do it for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_5">5&#160;</span>David said to Jonathan, “Behold, tomorrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to dine with the king; but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field to the third day at evening. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_6">6&#160;</span>If your father misses me at all, then say, ‘David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem, his city; for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all the family.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S120_7">7&#160;</span>If he says, ‘It is well,’ your servant shall have peace; but if he is angry, then know that evil is determined by him. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore deal kindly with your servant, for you have brought your servant into a covenant of Yahweh with you; but if there is iniquity in me, kill me yourself, for why should you bring me to your father?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_9">9&#160;</span>Jonathan said, “Far be it from you; for if I should at all know that evil were determined by my father to come on you, then wouldn’t I tell you that?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_10">10&#160;</span>Then David said to Jonathan, “Who will tell me if your father answers you roughly?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_11">11&#160;</span>Jonathan said to David, “Come! Let’s go out into the field.” They both went out into the field. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_12">12&#160;</span>Jonathan said to David, “By Yahweh, the God of Israel, when I have sounded out my father about this time tomorrow, or the third day, behold, if there is good toward David, won’t I then send to you and disclose it to you? 
<span class="verse" id="S120_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh do so to Jonathan and more also, should it please my father to do you evil, if I don’t disclose it to you and send you away, that you may go in peace. May Yahweh be with you as he has been with my father. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_14">14&#160;</span>You shall not only show me the loving kindness of Yahweh while I still live, that I not die; 
<span class="verse" id="S120_15">15&#160;</span>but you shall also not cut off your kindness from my house forever, no, not when Yahweh has cut off every one of the enemies of David from the surface of the earth.” 
<span class="verse" id="S120_16">16&#160;</span>So Jonathan made a covenant with David’s house, saying, “Yahweh will require it at the hand of David’s enemies.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_17">17&#160;</span>Jonathan caused David to swear again, for the love that he had to him; for he loved him as he loved his own soul. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_18">18&#160;</span>Then Jonathan said to him, “Tomorrow is the new moon, and you will be missed, because your seat will be empty. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_19">19&#160;</span>When you have stayed three days, go down quickly and come to the place where you hid yourself when this started, and remain by the stone Ezel. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_20">20&#160;</span>I will shoot three arrows on its side, as though I shot at a mark. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_21">21&#160;</span>Behold, I will send the boy, saying, ‘Go, find the arrows!’ If I tell the boy, ‘Behold, the arrows are on this side of you. Take them;’ then come, for there is peace to you and no danger, as Yahweh lives. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_22">22&#160;</span>But if I say this to the boy, ‘Behold, the arrows are beyond you,’ then go your way, for Yahweh has sent you away. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_23">23&#160;</span>Concerning the matter which you and I have spoken of, behold, Yahweh is between you and me forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_24">24&#160;</span>So David hid himself in the field. When the new moon had come, the king sat himself down to eat food. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_25">25&#160;</span>The king sat on his seat, as at other times, even on the seat by the wall; and Jonathan stood up, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, but David’s place was empty. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_26">26&#160;</span>Nevertheless Saul didn’t say anything that day, for he thought, “Something has happened to him. He is not clean. Surely he is not clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_27">27&#160;</span>On the next day after the new moon, the second day, David’s place was empty. Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why didn’t the son of Jesse come to eat, either yesterday, or today?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_28">28&#160;</span>Jonathan answered Saul, “David earnestly asked permission of me to go to Bethlehem. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_29">29&#160;</span>He said, ‘Please let me go, for our family has a sacrifice in the city. My brother has commanded me to be there. Now, if I have found favor in your eyes, please let me go away and see my brothers.’ Therefore he has not come to the king’s table.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_30">30&#160;</span>Then Saul’s anger burned against Jonathan, and he said to him, “You son of a perverse rebellious woman, don’t I know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame, and to the shame of your mother’s nakedness? 
<span class="verse" id="S120_31">31&#160;</span>For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth, you will not be established, nor will your kingdom. Therefore now send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_32">32&#160;</span>Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said to him, “Why should he be put to death? What has he done?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_33">33&#160;</span>Saul cast his spear at him to strike him. By this Jonathan knew that his father was determined to put David to death. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_34">34&#160;</span>So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and ate no food the second day of the month; for he was grieved for David, because his father had treated him shamefully. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_35">35&#160;</span>In the morning, Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little boy with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_36">36&#160;</span>He said to his boy, “Run, find now the arrows which I shoot.” As the boy ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_37">37&#160;</span>When the boy had come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the boy, and said, “Isn’t the arrow beyond you?” 
<span class="verse" id="S120_38">38&#160;</span>Jonathan cried after the boy, “Go fast! Hurry! Don’t delay!” Jonathan’s boy gathered up the arrows, and came to his master. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_39">39&#160;</span>But the boy didn’t know anything. Only Jonathan and David knew the matter. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_40">40&#160;</span>Jonathan gave his weapons to his boy, and said to him, “Go, carry them to the city.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S120_41">41&#160;</span>As soon as the boy was gone, David arose out of the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times. They kissed one another and wept with one another, and David wept the most. 
<span class="verse" id="S120_42">42&#160;</span>Jonathan said to David, “Go in peace, because we have both sworn in Yahweh’s name, saying, ‘Yahweh is between me and you, and between my offspring and your offspring, forever.’ ” He arose and departed; and Jonathan went into the city.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S121_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_1">1&#160;</span>Then David came to Nob to Ahimelech the priest. Ahimelech came to meet David trembling, and said to him, “Why are you alone, and no man with you?” 
<span class="verse" id="S121_2">2&#160;</span>David said to Ahimelech the priest, “The king has commanded me to do something, and has said to me, ‘Let no one know anything about the business about which I send you, and what I have commanded you. I have sent the young men to a certain place.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S121_3">3&#160;</span>Now therefore what is under your hand? Please give me five loaves of bread in my hand, or whatever is available.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_4">4&#160;</span>The priest answered David, and said, “I have no common bread, but there is holy bread; if only the young men have kept themselves from women.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_5">5&#160;</span>David answered the priest, and said to him, “Truly, women have been kept from us as usual these three days. When I came out, the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was only a common journey. How much more then today shall their vessels be holy?” 
<span class="verse" id="S121_6">6&#160;</span>So the priest gave him holy bread; for there was no bread there but the show bread that was taken from before Yahweh, to be replaced with hot bread in the day when it was taken away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_7">7&#160;</span>Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before Yahweh; and his name was Doeg the Edomite, the best of the herdsmen who belonged to Saul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_8">8&#160;</span>David said to Ahimelech, “Isn’t there here under your hand spear or sword? For I haven’t brought my sword or my weapons with me, because the king’s business required haste.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_9">9&#160;</span>The priest said, “Behold, the sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom you killed in the valley of Elah, is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If you would like to take that, take it, for there is no other except that here.” </div>
<div class='p'>David said, “There is none like that. Give it to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_10">10&#160;</span>David arose and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath. 
<span class="verse" id="S121_11">11&#160;</span>The servants of Achish said to him, “Isn’t this David the king of the land? Didn’t they sing to one another about him in dances, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Saul has slain his thousands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and David his ten thousands?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S121_12">12&#160;</span>David laid up these words in his heart, and was very afraid of Achish the king of Gath. 
<span class="verse" id="S121_13">13&#160;</span>He changed his behavior before them and pretended to be insane in their hands, and scribbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down on his beard. 
<span class="verse" id="S121_14">14&#160;</span>Then Achish said to his servants, “Look, you see the man is insane. Why then have you brought him to me? 
<span class="verse" id="S121_15">15&#160;</span>Do I lack madmen, that you have brought this fellow to play the madman in my presence? Should this fellow come into my house?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S122_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_1">1&#160;</span>David therefore departed from there and escaped to Adullam’s cave. When his brothers and all his father’s house heard it, they went down there to him. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_2">2&#160;</span>Everyone who was in distress, everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was discontented gathered themselves to him; and he became captain over them. There were with him about four hundred men. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_3">3&#160;</span>David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab; and he said to the king of Moab, “Please let my father and my mother come out to you, until I know what God will do for me.” 
<span class="verse" id="S122_4">4&#160;</span>He brought them before the king of Moab; and they lived with him all the time that David was in the stronghold. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_5">5&#160;</span>The prophet Gad said to David, “Don’t stay in the stronghold. Depart, and go into the land of Judah.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hereth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_6">6&#160;</span>Saul heard that David was discovered, with the men who were with him. Now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, under the tamarisk tree in Ramah, with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing around him. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_7">7&#160;</span>Saul said to his servants who stood around him, “Hear now, you Benjamites! Will the son of Jesse give everyone of you fields and vineyards? Will he make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds? 
<span class="verse" id="S122_8">8&#160;</span>Is that why all of you have conspired against me, and there is no one who discloses to me when my son makes a treaty with the son of Jesse, and there is none of you who is sorry for me, or discloses to me that my son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as it is today?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_9">9&#160;</span>Then Doeg the Edomite, who stood by the servants of Saul, answered and said, “I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_10">10&#160;</span>He inquired of Yahweh for him, gave him food, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_11">11&#160;</span>Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father’s house, the priests who were in Nob; and they all came to the king. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_12">12&#160;</span>Saul said, “Hear now, you son of Ahitub.” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “Here I am, my lord.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_13">13&#160;</span>Saul said to him, “Why have you conspired against me, you and the son of Jesse, in that you have given him bread, and a sword, and have inquired of God for him, that he should rise against me, to lie in wait, as it is today?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_14">14&#160;</span>Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, “Who among all your servants is so faithful as David, who is the king’s son-in-law, captain of your body guard, and honored in your house? 
<span class="verse" id="S122_15">15&#160;</span>Have I today begun to inquire of God for him? Be it far from me! Don’t let the king impute anything to his servant, nor to all the house of my father; for your servant knew nothing of all this, less or more.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_16">16&#160;</span>The king said, “You shall surely die, Ahimelech, you and all your father’s house.” 
<span class="verse" id="S122_17">17&#160;</span>The king said to the guard who stood about him, “Turn and kill the priests of Yahweh, because their hand also is with David, and because they knew that he fled and didn’t disclose it to me.” But the servants of the king wouldn’t put out their hand to fall on the priests of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_18">18&#160;</span>The king said to Doeg, “Turn and attack the priests!” </div>
<div class='p'>Doeg the Edomite turned, and he attacked the priests, and he killed on that day eighty-five people who wore a linen ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_19">19&#160;</span>He struck Nob, the city of the priests, with the edge of the sword—both men and women, children and nursing babies, and cattle, donkeys, and sheep, with the edge of the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_20">20&#160;</span>One of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped and fled after David. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_21">21&#160;</span>Abiathar told David that Saul had slain Yahweh’s priests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S122_22">22&#160;</span>David said to Abiathar, “I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul. I am responsible for the death of all the persons of your father’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="S122_23">23&#160;</span>Stay with me. Don’t be afraid, for he who seeks my life seeks your life. You will be safe with me.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S123_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_1">1&#160;</span>David was told, “Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and are robbing the threshing floors.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore David inquired of Yahweh, saying, “Shall I go and strike these Philistines?” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh said to David, “Go strike the Philistines, and save Keilah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_3">3&#160;</span>David’s men said to him, “Behold, we are afraid here in Judah. How much more then if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_4">4&#160;</span>Then David inquired of Yahweh yet again. Yahweh answered him, and said, “Arise, go down to Keilah; for I will deliver the Philistines into your hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_5">5&#160;</span>David and his men went to Keilah and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their livestock, and killed them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_6">6&#160;</span>When Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, he came down with an ephod in his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_7">7&#160;</span>Saul was told that David had come to Keilah. Saul said, “God has delivered him into my hand, for he is shut in by entering into a town that has gates and bars.” 
<span class="verse" id="S123_8">8&#160;</span>Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah to besiege David and his men. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_9">9&#160;</span>David knew that Saul was devising mischief against him. He said to Abiathar the priest, “Bring the ephod here.” 
<span class="verse" id="S123_10">10&#160;</span>Then David said, “O Yahweh, the God of Israel, your servant has surely heard that Saul seeks to come to Keilah to destroy the city for my sake. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_11">11&#160;</span>Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? Will Saul come down, as your servant has heard? Yahweh, the God of Israel, I beg you, tell your servant.” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh said, “He will come down.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_12">12&#160;</span>Then David said, “Will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the hand of Saul?” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh said, “They will deliver you up.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_13">13&#160;</span>Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah and went wherever they could go. Saul was told that David had escaped from Keilah; and he gave up going there. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_14">14&#160;</span>David stayed in the wilderness in the strongholds, and remained in the hill country in the wilderness of Ziph. Saul sought him every day, but God didn’t deliver him into his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_15">15&#160;</span>David saw that Saul had come out to seek his life. David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the woods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_16">16&#160;</span>Jonathan, Saul’s son, arose and went to David into the woods, and strengthened his hand in God. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_17">17&#160;</span>He said to him, “Don’t be afraid, for the hand of Saul my father won’t find you; and you will be king over Israel, and I will be next to you; and Saul my father knows that also.” 
<span class="verse" id="S123_18">18&#160;</span>They both made a covenant before Yahweh. Then David stayed in the woods and Jonathan went to his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_19">19&#160;</span>Then the Ziphites came up to Saul to Gibeah, saying, “Doesn’t David hide himself with us in the strongholds in the woods, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of the desert? 
<span class="verse" id="S123_20">20&#160;</span>Now therefore, O king, come down. According to all the desire of your soul to come down; and our part will be to deliver him up into the king’s hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_21">21&#160;</span>Saul said, “You are blessed by Yahweh, for you have had compassion on me. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_22">22&#160;</span>Please go make yet more sure, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who has seen him there; for I have been told that he is very cunning. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_23">23&#160;</span>See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he hides himself; and come again to me with certainty, and I will go with you. It shall happen, if he is in the land, that I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_24">24&#160;</span>They arose, and went to Ziph before Saul; but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on the south of the desert. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_25">25&#160;</span>Saul and his men went to seek him. When David was told, he went down to the rock, and stayed in the wilderness of Maon. When Saul heard that, he pursued David in the wilderness of Maon. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_26">26&#160;</span>Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain; and David hurried to get away for fear of Saul, for Saul and his men surrounded David and his men to take them. 
<span class="verse" id="S123_27">27&#160;</span>But a messenger came to Saul, saying, “Hurry and come, for the Philistines have made a raid on the land!” 
<span class="verse" id="S123_28">28&#160;</span>So Saul returned from pursuing David, and went against the Philistines. Therefore they called that place Sela Hammahlekoth.<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S123_29">29&#160;</span>David went up from there and lived in the strongholds of En Gedi.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S124_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_1">1&#160;</span>When Saul had returned from following the Philistines, he was told, “Behold, David is in the wilderness of En Gedi.” 
<span class="verse" id="S124_2">2&#160;</span>Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men on the rocks of the wild goats. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_3">3&#160;</span>He came to the sheep pens by the way, where there was a cave; and Saul went in to relieve himself. Now David and his men were staying in the innermost parts of the cave. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_4">4&#160;</span>David’s men said to him, “Behold, the day of which Yahweh said to you, ‘Behold, I will deliver your enemy into your hand, and you shall do to him as it shall seem good to you.’ ” Then David arose and cut off the skirt of Saul’s robe secretly. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_5">5&#160;</span>Afterward, David’s heart struck him because he had cut off Saul’s skirt. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_6">6&#160;</span>He said to his men, “Yahweh forbid that I should do this thing to my lord, Yahweh’s anointed, to stretch out my hand against him, since he is Yahweh’s anointed.” 
<span class="verse" id="S124_7">7&#160;</span>So David checked his men with these words, and didn’t allow them to rise against Saul. Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_8">8&#160;</span>David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave and cried after Saul, saying, “My lord the king!” </div>
<div class='p'>When Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth, and showed respect. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_9">9&#160;</span>David said to Saul, “Why do you listen to men’s words, saying, ‘Behold, David seeks to harm you?’ 
<span class="verse" id="S124_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, today your eyes have seen how Yahweh had delivered you today into my hand in the cave. Some urged me to kill you, but I spared you. I said, ‘I will not stretch out my hand against my lord, for he is Yahweh’s anointed.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S124_11">11&#160;</span>Moreover, my father, behold, yes, see the skirt of your robe in my hand; for in that I cut off the skirt of your robe and didn’t kill you, know and see that there is neither evil nor disobedience in my hand. I have not sinned against you, though you hunt for my life to take it. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_12">12&#160;</span>May Yahweh judge between me and you, and may Yahweh avenge me of you; but my hand will not be on you. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_13">13&#160;</span>As the proverb of the ancients says, ‘Out of the wicked comes wickedness;’ but my hand will not be on you. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_14">14&#160;</span>Against whom has the king of Israel come out? Whom do you pursue? A dead dog? A flea? 
<span class="verse" id="S124_15">15&#160;</span>May Yahweh therefore be judge, and give sentence between me and you, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of your hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_16">16&#160;</span>It came to pass, when David had finished speaking these words to Saul, that Saul said, “Is that your voice, my son David?” Saul lifted up his voice and wept. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_17">17&#160;</span>He said to David, “You are more righteous than I; for you have done good to me, whereas I have done evil to you. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_18">18&#160;</span>You have declared today how you have dealt well with me, because when Yahweh had delivered me up into your hand, you didn’t kill me. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_19">19&#160;</span>For if a man finds his enemy, will he let him go away unharmed? Therefore may Yahweh reward you good for that which you have done to me today. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_20">20&#160;</span>Now, behold, I know that you will surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel will be established in your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S124_21">21&#160;</span>Swear now therefore to me by Yahweh that you will not cut off my offspring after me, and that you will not destroy my name out of my father’s house.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S124_22">22&#160;</span>David swore to Saul. Saul went home, but David and his men went up to the stronghold.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S125_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_1">1&#160;</span>Samuel died; and all Israel gathered themselves together and mourned for him, and buried him at his house at Ramah. </div>
<div class='p'>Then David arose and went down to the wilderness of Paran. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_2">2&#160;</span>There was a man in Maon whose possessions were in Carmel; and the man was very great. He had three thousand sheep and a thousand goats; and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_3">3&#160;</span>Now the name of the man was Nabal; and the name of his wife Abigail. This woman was intelligent and had a beautiful face; but the man was surly and evil in his doings. He was of the house of Caleb. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_4">4&#160;</span>David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_5">5&#160;</span>David sent ten young men; and David said to the young men, “Go up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_6">6&#160;</span>Tell him, ‘Long life to you! Peace be to you! Peace be to your house! Peace be to all that you have! 
<span class="verse" id="S125_7">7&#160;</span>Now I have heard that you have shearers. Your shepherds have now been with us, and we didn’t harm them. Nothing was missing from them all the time they were in Carmel. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_8">8&#160;</span>Ask your young men, and they will tell you. Therefore let the young men find favor in your eyes, for we come on a good day. Please give whatever comes to your hand to your servants and to your son David.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_9">9&#160;</span>When David’s young men came, they spoke to Nabal all those words in the name of David, and waited. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_10">10&#160;</span>Nabal answered David’s servants and said, “Who is David? Who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants who break away from their masters these days. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_11">11&#160;</span>Shall I then take my bread, my water, and my meat that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men who I don’t know where they come from?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_12">12&#160;</span>So David’s young men turned on their way and went back, and came and told him all these words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_13">13&#160;</span>David said to his men, “Every man put on his sword!” </div>
<div class='p'>Every man put on his sword. David also put on his sword. About four hundred men followed David, and two hundred stayed by the baggage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_14">14&#160;</span>But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal’s wife, saying, “Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to greet our master; and he insulted them. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_15">15&#160;</span>But the men were very good to us, and we were not harmed, and we didn’t miss anything as long as we went with them, when we were in the fields. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_16">16&#160;</span>They were a wall to us both by night and by day, all the while we were with them keeping the sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_17">17&#160;</span>Now therefore know and consider what you will do; for evil is determined against our master and against all his house, for he is such a worthless fellow that one can’t speak to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_18">18&#160;</span>Then Abigail hurried and took two hundred loaves of bread, two containers of wine, five sheep ready dressed, five seahs<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of parched grain, one hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on donkeys. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_19">19&#160;</span>She said to her young men, “Go on before me. Behold, I am coming after you.” But she didn’t tell her husband, Nabal. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_20">20&#160;</span>As she rode on her donkey, and came down hidden by the mountain, behold, David and his men came down toward her, and she met them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_21">21&#160;</span>Now David had said, “Surely in vain I have kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness, so that nothing was missed of all that pertained to him. He has returned me evil for good. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_22">22&#160;</span>God do so to the enemies of David, and more also, if I leave of all that belongs to him by the morning light so much as one who urinates on a wall.”<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_23">23&#160;</span>When Abigail saw David, she hurried and got off her donkey, and fell before David on her face and bowed herself to the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_24">24&#160;</span>She fell at his feet and said, “On me, my lord, on me be the blame! Please let your servant speak in your ears. Hear the words of your servant. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_25">25&#160;</span>Please don’t let my lord pay attention to this worthless fellow, Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> is his name, and folly is with him; but I, your servant, didn’t see my lord’s young men whom you sent. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_26">26&#160;</span>Now therefore, my lord, as Yahweh lives and as your soul lives, since Yahweh has withheld you from blood guiltiness and from avenging yourself with your own hand, now therefore let your enemies and those who seek evil to my lord be as Nabal. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_27">27&#160;</span>Now this present which your servant has brought to my lord, let it be given to the young men who follow my lord. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_28">28&#160;</span>Please forgive the trespass of your servant. For Yahweh will certainly make my lord a sure house, because my lord fights Yahweh’s battles. Evil will not be found in you all your days. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_29">29&#160;</span>Though men may rise up to pursue you and to seek your soul, yet the soul of my lord will be bound in the bundle of life with Yahweh your God. He will sling out the souls of your enemies as from a sling’s pocket. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_30">30&#160;</span>It will come to pass, when Yahweh has done to my lord according to all the good that he has spoken concerning you, and has appointed you prince over Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="S125_31">31&#160;</span>that this shall be no grief to you, nor offense of heart to my lord, either that you have shed blood without cause, or that my lord has avenged himself. When Yahweh has dealt well with my lord, then remember your servant.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_32">32&#160;</span>David said to Abigail, “Blessed is Yahweh, the God of Israel, who sent you today to meet me! 
<span class="verse" id="S125_33">33&#160;</span>Blessed is your discretion, and blessed are you, who have kept me today from blood guiltiness, and from avenging myself with my own hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_34">34&#160;</span>For indeed, as Yahweh the God of Israel lives, who has withheld me from harming you, unless you had hurried and come to meet me, surely there wouldn’t have been left to Nabal by the morning light so much as one who urinates on a wall.”<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_35">35&#160;</span>So David received from her hand that which she had brought him. Then he said to her, “Go up in peace to your house. Behold, I have listened to your voice and have granted your request.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_36">36&#160;</span>Abigail came to Nabal; and behold, he held a feast in his house like the feast of a king. Nabal’s heart was merry within him, for he was very drunk. Therefore she told him nothing until the morning light. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_37">37&#160;</span>In the morning, when the wine had gone out of Nabal, his wife told him these things; and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_38">38&#160;</span>About ten days later, Yahweh struck Nabal, so that he died. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_39">39&#160;</span>When David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, “Blessed is Yahweh, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil. Yahweh has returned the evildoing of Nabal on his own head.” </div>
<div class='p'>David sent and spoke concerning Abigail, to take her to himself as wife. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_40">40&#160;</span>When David’s servants had come to Abigail to Carmel, they spoke to her, saying, “David has sent us to you, to take you to him as wife.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_41">41&#160;</span>She arose and bowed herself with her face to the earth, and said, “Behold, your servant is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.” 
<span class="verse" id="S125_42">42&#160;</span>Abigail hurriedly arose and rode on a donkey with her five maids who followed her; and she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife. 
<span class="verse" id="S125_43">43&#160;</span>David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel; and they both became his wives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S125_44">44&#160;</span>Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David’s wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was of Gallim.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S126_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_1">1&#160;</span>The Ziphites came to Saul to Gibeah, saying, “Doesn’t David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert?” 
<span class="verse" id="S126_2">2&#160;</span>Then Saul arose and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_3">3&#160;</span>Saul encamped in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert, by the way. But David stayed in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_4">4&#160;</span>David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul had certainly come. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_5">5&#160;</span>Then David arose and came to the place where Saul had encamped; and David saw the place where Saul lay, with Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his army. Saul lay within the place of the wagons, and the people were encamped around him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_6">6&#160;</span>Then David answered and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother of Joab, saying, “Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp?” </div>
<div class='p'>Abishai said, “I will go down with you.” 
<span class="verse" id="S126_7">7&#160;</span>So David and Abishai came to the people by night; and, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the place of the wagons, with his spear stuck in the ground at his head; and Abner and the people lay around him. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_8">8&#160;</span>Then Abishai said to David, “God has delivered up your enemy into your hand today. Now therefore please let me strike him with the spear to the earth at one stroke, and I will not strike him the second time.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_9">9&#160;</span>David said to Abishai, “Don’t destroy him, for who can stretch out his hand against Yahweh’s anointed, and be guiltless?” 
<span class="verse" id="S126_10">10&#160;</span>David said, “As Yahweh lives, Yahweh will strike him; or his day shall come to die, or he shall go down into battle and perish. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh forbid that I should stretch out my hand against Yahweh’s anointed; but now please take the spear that is at his head and the jar of water, and let’s go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_12">12&#160;</span>So David took the spear and the jar of water from Saul’s head, and they went away. No man saw it, or knew it, nor did any awake; for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Yahweh had fallen on them. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_13">13&#160;</span>Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of the mountain far away, a great space being between them; 
<span class="verse" id="S126_14">14&#160;</span>and David cried to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, “Don’t you answer, Abner?” </div>
<div class='p'>Then Abner answered, “Who are you who calls to the king?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_15">15&#160;</span>David said to Abner, “Aren’t you a man? Who is like you in Israel? Why then have you not kept watch over your lord the king? For one of the people came in to destroy your lord the king. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_16">16&#160;</span>This thing isn’t good that you have done. As Yahweh lives, you are worthy to die, because you have not kept watch over your lord, Yahweh’s anointed. Now see where the king’s spear is, and the jar of water that was at his head.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_17">17&#160;</span>Saul recognized David’s voice, and said, “Is this your voice, my son David?” </div>
<div class='p'>David said, “It is my voice, my lord, O king.” 
<span class="verse" id="S126_18">18&#160;</span>He said, “Why does my lord pursue his servant? For what have I done? What evil is in my hand? 
<span class="verse" id="S126_19">19&#160;</span>Now therefore, please let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If it is so that Yahweh has stirred you up against me, let him accept an offering. But if it is the children of men, they are cursed before Yahweh; for they have driven me out today that I shouldn’t cling to Yahweh’s inheritance, saying, ‘Go, serve other gods!’ 
<span class="verse" id="S126_20">20&#160;</span>Now therefore, don’t let my blood fall to the earth away from the presence of Yahweh; for the king of Israel has come out to seek a flea, as when one hunts a partridge in the mountains.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_21">21&#160;</span>Then Saul said, “I have sinned. Return, my son David; for I will no more do you harm, because my life was precious in your eyes today. Behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_22">22&#160;</span>David answered, “Behold the spear, O king! Let one of the young men come over and get it. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh will render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness; because Yahweh delivered you into my hand today, and I wouldn’t stretch out my hand against Yahweh’s anointed. 
<span class="verse" id="S126_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, as your life was respected today in my eyes, so let my life be respected in Yahweh’s eyes, and let him deliver me out of all oppression.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S126_25">25&#160;</span>Then Saul said to David, “You are blessed, my son David. You will both do mightily, and will surely prevail.” </div>
<div class='p'>So David went his way, and Saul returned to his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S127_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_1">1&#160;</span>David said in his heart, “I will now perish one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than that I should escape into the land of the Philistines; and Saul will despair of me, to seek me any more in all the borders of Israel. So I will escape out of his hand.” 
<span class="verse" id="S127_2">2&#160;</span>David arose and passed over, he and the six hundred men who were with him, to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath. 
<span class="verse" id="S127_3">3&#160;</span>David lived with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="S127_4">4&#160;</span>Saul was told that David had fled to Gath, so he stopped looking for him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_5">5&#160;</span>David said to Achish, “If now I have found favor in your eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities in the country, that I may dwell there. For why should your servant dwell in the royal city with you?” 
<span class="verse" id="S127_6">6&#160;</span>Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day: therefore Ziklag belongs to the kings of Judah to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="S127_7">7&#160;</span>The number of the days that David lived in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_8">8&#160;</span>David and his men went up and raided the Geshurites, the Girzites, and the Amalekites; for those were the inhabitants of the land who were of old, on the way to Shur, even to the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="S127_9">9&#160;</span>David struck the land, and saved no man or woman alive, and took away the sheep, the cattle, the donkeys, the camels, and the clothing. Then he returned, and came to Achish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_10">10&#160;</span>Achish said, “Against whom have you made a raid today?” </div>
<div class='p'>David said, “Against the South of Judah, against the South of the Jerahmeelites, and against the South of the Kenites.” 
<span class="verse" id="S127_11">11&#160;</span>David saved neither man nor woman alive to bring them to Gath, saying, “Lest they should tell about us, saying, ‘David did this, and this has been his way all the time he has lived in the country of the Philistines.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S127_12">12&#160;</span>Achish believed David, saying, “He has made his people Israel utterly to abhor him. Therefore he will be my servant forever.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S128_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_1">1&#160;</span>In those days, the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare, to fight with Israel. Achish said to David, “Know assuredly that you will go out with me in the army, you and your men.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_2">2&#160;</span>David said to Achish, “Therefore you will know what your servant can do.” </div>
<div class='p'>Achish said to David, “Therefore I will make you my bodyguard forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_3">3&#160;</span>Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. Saul had sent away those who had familiar spirits and the wizards out of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_4">4&#160;</span>The Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and encamped in Shunem; and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they encamped in Gilboa. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_5">5&#160;</span>When Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_6">6&#160;</span>When Saul inquired of Yahweh, Yahweh didn’t answer him by dreams, by Urim, or by prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_7">7&#160;</span>Then Saul said to his servants, “Seek for me a woman who has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her and inquire of her.” </div>
<div class='p'>His servants said to him, “Behold, there is a woman who has a familiar spirit at Endor.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_8">8&#160;</span>Saul disguised himself and put on other clothing, and went, he and two men with him, and they came to the woman by night. Then he said, “Please consult for me by the familiar spirit, and bring me up whomever I shall name to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_9">9&#160;</span>The woman said to him, “Behold, you know what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who have familiar spirits and the wizards out of the land. Why then do you lay a snare for my life, to cause me to die?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_10">10&#160;</span>Saul swore to her by Yahweh, saying, “As Yahweh lives, no punishment will happen to you for this thing.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_11">11&#160;</span>Then the woman said, “Whom shall I bring up to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Bring Samuel up for me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_12">12&#160;</span>When the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice; and the woman spoke to Saul, saying, “Why have you deceived me? For you are Saul!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_13">13&#160;</span>The king said to her, “Don’t be afraid! What do you see?” </div>
<div class='p'>The woman said to Saul, “I see a god coming up out of the earth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_14">14&#160;</span>He said to her, “What does he look like?” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “An old man comes up. He is covered with a robe.” Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground, and showed respect. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_15">15&#160;</span>Samuel said to Saul, “Why have you disturbed me, to bring me up?” </div>
<div class='p'>Saul answered, “I am very distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and God has departed from me, and answers me no more, by prophets, or by dreams. Therefore I have called you, that you may make known to me what I shall do.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_16">16&#160;</span>Samuel said, “Why then do you ask me, since Yahweh has departed from you and has become your adversary? 
<span class="verse" id="S128_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh has done to you as he spoke by me. Yahweh has torn the kingdom out of your hand and given it to your neighbor, even to David. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_18">18&#160;</span>Because you didn’t obey Yahweh’s voice, and didn’t execute his fierce wrath on Amalek, therefore Yahweh has done this thing to you today. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_19">19&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh will deliver Israel also with you into the hand of the Philistines; and tomorrow you and your sons will be with me. Yahweh will deliver the army of Israel also into the hand of the Philistines.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_20">20&#160;</span>Then Saul fell immediately his full length on the earth, and was terrified, because of Samuel’s words. There was no strength in him, for he had eaten no bread all day long or all night long. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_21">21&#160;</span>The woman came to Saul and saw that he was very troubled, and said to him, “Behold, your servant has listened to your voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have listened to your words which you spoke to me. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_22">22&#160;</span>Now therefore, please listen also to the voice of your servant, and let me set a morsel of bread before you. Eat, that you may have strength when you go on your way.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S128_23">23&#160;</span>But he refused, and said, “I will not eat.” But his servants, together with the woman, constrained him; and he listened to their voice. So he arose from the earth and sat on the bed. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_24">24&#160;</span>The woman had a fattened calf in the house. She hurried and killed it; and she took flour and kneaded it, and baked unleavened bread of it. 
<span class="verse" id="S128_25">25&#160;</span>She brought it before Saul and before his servants, and they ate. Then they rose up and went away that night.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S129_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_1">1&#160;</span>Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek; and the Israelites encamped by the spring which is in Jezreel. 
<span class="verse" id="S129_2">2&#160;</span>The lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds and by thousands; and David and his men passed on in the rear with Achish. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_3">3&#160;</span>Then the princes of the Philistines said, “What about these Hebrews?” </div>
<div class='p'>Achish said to the princes of the Philistines, “Isn’t this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, who has been with me these days, or rather these years? I have found no fault in him since he fell away until today.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_4">4&#160;</span>But the princes of the Philistines were angry with him; and the princes of the Philistines said to him, “Make the man return, that he may go back to his place where you have appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become an adversary to us. For with what should this fellow reconcile himself to his lord? Should it not be with the heads of these men? 
<span class="verse" id="S129_5">5&#160;</span>Isn’t this David, of whom people sang to one another in dances, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Saul has slain his thousands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and David his ten thousands?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_6">6&#160;</span>Then Achish called David and said to him, “As Yahweh lives, you have been upright, and your going out and your coming in with me in the army is good in my sight; for I have not found evil in you since the day of your coming to me to this day. Nevertheless, the lords don’t favor you. 
<span class="verse" id="S129_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore now return, and go in peace, that you not displease the lords of the Philistines.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_8">8&#160;</span>David said to Achish, “But what have I done? What have you found in your servant so long as I have been before you to this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_9">9&#160;</span>Achish answered David, “I know that you are good in my sight, as an angel of God. Notwithstanding, the princes of the Philistines have said, ‘He shall not go up with us to the battle.’ 
<span class="verse" id="S129_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore now rise up early in the morning with the servants of your lord who have come with you; and as soon as you are up early in the morning and have light, depart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S129_11">11&#160;</span>So David rose up early, he and his men, to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines; and the Philistines went up to Jezreel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S130_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_1">1&#160;</span>When David and his men had come to Ziklag on the third day, the Amalekites had made a raid on the South and on Ziklag, and had struck Ziklag and burned it with fire, 
<span class="verse" id="S130_2">2&#160;</span>and had taken captive the women and all who were in it, both small and great. They didn’t kill any, but carried them off and went their way. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_3">3&#160;</span>When David and his men came to the city, behold, it was burned with fire; and their wives, their sons, and their daughters were taken captive. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_4">4&#160;</span>Then David and the people who were with him lifted up their voice and wept until they had no more power to weep. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_5">5&#160;</span>David’s two wives were taken captive, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_6">6&#160;</span>David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him, because the souls of all the people were grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters; but David strengthened himself in Yahweh his God. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_7">7&#160;</span>David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, “Please bring the ephod here to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>Abiathar brought the ephod to David. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_8">8&#160;</span>David inquired of Yahweh, saying, “If I pursue after this troop, will I overtake them?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered him, “Pursue, for you will surely overtake them, and will without fail recover all.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_9">9&#160;</span>So David went, he and the six hundred men who were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those who were left behind stayed. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_10">10&#160;</span>But David pursued, he and four hundred men; for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they couldn’t go over the brook Besor. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_11">11&#160;</span>They found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread, and he ate; and they gave him water to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_12">12&#160;</span>They gave him a piece of a cake of figs and two clusters of raisins. When he had eaten, his spirit came again to him; for he had eaten no bread, and drank no water for three days and three nights. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_13">13&#160;</span>David asked him, “To whom do you belong? Where are you from?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite; and my master left me, because three days ago I got sick. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_14">14&#160;</span>We made a raid on the South of the Cherethites, and on that which belongs to Judah, and on the South of Caleb; and we burned Ziklag with fire.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_15">15&#160;</span>David said to him, “Will you bring me down to this troop?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Swear to me by God that you will not kill me and not deliver me up into the hands of my master, and I will bring you down to this troop.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_16">16&#160;</span>When he had brought him down, behold, they were spread around over all the ground, eating, drinking, and dancing, because of all the great plunder that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_17">17&#160;</span>David struck them from the twilight even to the evening of the next day. Not a man of them escaped from there, except four hundred young men who rode on camels and fled. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_18">18&#160;</span>David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken, and David rescued his two wives. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_19">19&#160;</span>There was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither plunder, nor anything that they had taken. David brought them all back. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_20">20&#160;</span>David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before those other livestock, and said, “This is David’s plunder.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_21">21&#160;</span>David came to the two hundred men, who were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had made to stay at the brook Besor; and they went out to meet David, and to meet the people who were with him. When David came near to the people, he greeted them. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_22">22&#160;</span>Then all the wicked men and worthless fellows of those who went with David answered and said, “Because they didn’t go with us, we will not give them anything of the plunder that we have recovered, except to every man his wife and his children, that he may lead them away and depart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_23">23&#160;</span>Then David said, “Do not do so, my brothers, with that which Yahweh has given to us, who has preserved us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our hand. 
<span class="verse" id="S130_24">24&#160;</span>Who will listen to you in this matter? For as his share is who goes down to the battle, so shall his share be who stays with the baggage. They shall share alike.” 
<span class="verse" id="S130_25">25&#160;</span>It was so from that day forward that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S130_26">26&#160;</span>When David came to Ziklag, he sent some of the plunder to the elders of Judah, even to his friends, saying, “Behold, a present for you from the plunder of Yahweh’s enemies.” 
<span class="verse" id="S130_27">27&#160;</span>He sent it to those who were in Bethel, to those who were in Ramoth of the South, to those who were in Jattir, 
<span class="verse" id="S130_28">28&#160;</span>to those who were in Aroer, to those who were in Siphmoth, to those who were in Eshtemoa, 
<span class="verse" id="S130_29">29&#160;</span>to those who were in Racal, to those who were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, to those who were in the cities of the Kenites, 
<span class="verse" id="S130_30">30&#160;</span>to those who were in Hormah, to those who were in Borashan, to those who were in Athach, 
<span class="verse" id="S130_31">31&#160;</span>to those who were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men used to stay.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='S131_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_1">1&#160;</span>Now the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain on Mount Gilboa. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_2">2&#160;</span>The Philistines overtook Saul and his sons; and the Philistines killed Jonathan, Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_3">3&#160;</span>The battle went hard against Saul, and the archers overtook him; and he was greatly distressed by reason of the archers. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_4">4&#160;</span>Then Saul said to his armor bearer, “Draw your sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through and abuse me!” But his armor bearer would not, for he was terrified. Therefore Saul took his sword and fell on it. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_5">5&#160;</span>When his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell on his sword, and died with him. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_6">6&#160;</span>So Saul died with his three sons, his armor bearer, and all his men that same day together. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="S131_7">7&#160;</span>When the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley, and those who were beyond the Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled and that Saul and his sons were dead, they abandoned the cities and fled; and the Philistines came and lived in them. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_8">8&#160;</span>On the next day, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, they found Saul and his three sons fallen on Mount Gilboa. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_9">9&#160;</span>They cut off his head, stripped off his armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines all around, to carry the news to the house of their idols and to the people. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_10">10&#160;</span>They put his armor in the house of the Ashtaroth, and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth Shan. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_11">11&#160;</span>When the inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead heard what the Philistines had done to Saul, 
<span class="verse" id="S131_12">12&#160;</span>all the valiant men arose, went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth Shan; and they came to Jabesh and burned them there. 
<span class="verse" id="S131_13">13&#160;</span>They took their bones and buried them under the tamarisk<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> tree in Jabesh, and fasted seven days. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:3</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:20</a>
 <span class="ft">Samuel sounds like the Hebrew for “heard by God.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S11_24"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:24</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:20</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_31"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2:31</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S12_33"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2:33</a>
 <span class="ft">or, blind your eyes with tears</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S14_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:21</a>
 <span class="ft">“Ichabod” means “no glory”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S17_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:12</a>
 <span class="ft">“Ebenezer” means “stone of help”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S19_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:8</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 1/4 shekel would be a small coin of about 2.5 grams.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The traditional Hebrew text omits “thirty” and “forty-”. The blanks are filled in here from a few manuscripts of the Septuagint.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S113_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:21</a>
 <span class="ft">A payim (or pim) was 2/3 shekel of silver, or 0.26 ounces, or 7.6 grams</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S115_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:23</a>
 <span class="ft">teraphim were household idols that may have been associated with inheritance rights to the household property.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:4</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters. A span is the length from the tip of a man’s thumb to the tip of his little finger when his hand is stretched out (about half a cubit, or 9 inches, or 22.8 cm.) Therefore, Goliath was about 9 feet and 9 inches or 2.97 meters tall.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:5</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 5000 shekels is about 50 kilograms or 110 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:7</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 600 shekels is about 6 kilograms or about 13 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S117_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 17:17</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S119_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:13</a>
 <span class="ft">teraphim were household idols that may have been associated with inheritance rights to the household property.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S123_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:28</a>
 <span class="ft">“Sela Hammahlekoth” means “rock of parting”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:18</a>
 <span class="ft">1 seah is about 7 liters or 1.9 gallons or 0.8 pecks</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25:22</a>
 <span class="ft">or, male.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 25:25</a>
 <span class="ft">“Nabal” means “foolish”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S125_34"><span class="notemark">§</span> 25:34</a>
 <span class="ft">or, one male.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#S131_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, salt cedar</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
