<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon 2 Kings 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Kings</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K24_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K25_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K26_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K27_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K28_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K29_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K210_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K211_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K212_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K213_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K214_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K215_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K216_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K217_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K218_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K219_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K220_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K221_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K222_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K223_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K224_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='2KI.xhtml#K225_0'>25</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='K20_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of Kings  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K21_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="K21_1">1&#160;</span>Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_2">2&#160;</span>Ahaziah fell down through the lattice in his upper room that was in Samaria, and was sick. So he sent messengers, and said to them, “Go, inquire of Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I will recover of this sickness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_3">3&#160;</span>But Yahweh’s<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> angel said to Elijah the Tishbite, “Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and tell them, ‘Is it because there is no God<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> in Israel that you go to inquire of Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron? 
<span class="verse" id="K21_4">4&#160;</span>Now therefore Yahweh says, “You will not come down from the bed where you have gone up, but you will surely die.” ’ ” Then Elijah departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_5">5&#160;</span>The messengers returned to him, and he said to them, “Why is it that you have returned?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_6">6&#160;</span>They said to him, “A man came up to meet us, and said to us, ‘Go, return to the king who sent you, and tell him, “Yahweh says, ‘Is it because there is no God in Israel that you send to inquire of Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore you will not come down from the bed where you have gone up, but you will surely die.’ ” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_7">7&#160;</span>He said to them, “What kind of man was he who came up to meet you and told you these words?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_8">8&#160;</span>They answered him, “He was a hairy man, and wearing a leather belt around his waist.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “It’s Elijah the Tishbite.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_9">9&#160;</span>Then the king sent a captain of fifty with his fifty to him. He went up to him; and behold,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> he was sitting on the top of the hill. He said to him, “Man of God, the king has said, ‘Come down!’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_10">10&#160;</span>Elijah answered to the captain of fifty, “If I am a man of God, then let fire come down from the sky and consume you and your fifty!” Then fire came down from the sky, and consumed him and his fifty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_11">11&#160;</span>Again he sent to him another captain of fifty with his fifty. He answered him, “Man of God, the king has said, ‘Come down quickly!’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_12">12&#160;</span>Elijah answered them, “If I am a man of God, then let fire come down from the sky and consume you and your fifty!” Then God’s fire came down from the sky, and consumed him and his fifty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_13">13&#160;</span>Again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. The third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and begged him, and said to him, “Man of God, please let my life and the life of these fifty of your servants be precious in your sight. 
<span class="verse" id="K21_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, fire came down from the sky and consumed the last two captains of fifty with their fifties. But now let my life be precious in your sight.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh’s angel said to Elijah, “Go down with him. Don’t be afraid of him.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then he arose and went down with him to the king. 
<span class="verse" id="K21_16">16&#160;</span>He said to him, “Yahweh says, ‘Because you have sent messengers to inquire of Baal Zebub, the god of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his word? Therefore you will not come down from the bed where you have gone up, but you will surely die.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K21_17">17&#160;</span>So he died according to Yahweh’s word which Elijah had spoken. Jehoram began to reign in his place in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, because he had no son. 
<span class="verse" id="K21_18">18&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K22_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_1">1&#160;</span>When Yahweh was about to take Elijah up by a whirlwind into heaven, Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_2">2&#160;</span>Elijah said to Elisha, “Please wait here, for Yahweh has sent me as far as Bethel.” </div>
<div class='p'>Elisha said, “As Yahweh lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So they went down to Bethel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_3">3&#160;</span>The sons of the prophets who were at Bethel came out to Elisha, and said to him, “Do you know that Yahweh will take away your master from over you today?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Yes, I know it. Hold your peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_4">4&#160;</span>Elijah said to him, “Elisha, please wait here, for Yahweh has sent me to Jericho.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “As Yahweh lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” So they came to Jericho. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_5">5&#160;</span>The sons of the prophets who were at Jericho came near to Elisha, and said to him, “Do you know that Yahweh will take away your master from over you today?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “Yes, I know it. Hold your peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_6">6&#160;</span>Elijah said to him, “Please wait here, for Yahweh has sent me to the Jordan.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “As Yahweh lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” Then they both went on. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_7">7&#160;</span>Fifty men of the sons of the prophets went and stood opposite them at a distance; and they both stood by the Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_8">8&#160;</span>Elijah took his mantle, and rolled it up, and struck the waters; and they were divided here and there, so that they both went over on dry ground. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_9">9&#160;</span>When they had gone over, Elijah said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you, before I am taken from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>Elisha said, “Please let a double portion of your spirit be on me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_10">10&#160;</span>He said, “You have asked a hard thing. If you see me when I am taken from you, it will be so for you; but if not, it will not be so.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_11">11&#160;</span>As they continued on and talked, behold, a chariot of fire and horses of fire separated them; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_12">12&#160;</span>Elisha saw it, and he cried, “My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and its horsemen!” </div>
<div class='p'>He saw him no more. Then he took hold of his own clothes and tore them in two pieces. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_13">13&#160;</span>He also took up Elijah’s mantle that fell from him, and went back and stood by the bank of the Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_14">14&#160;</span>He took Elijah’s mantle that fell from him, and struck the waters, and said, “Where is Yahweh, the God of Elijah?” When he also had struck the waters, they were divided apart, and Elisha went over. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_15">15&#160;</span>When the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho facing him saw him, they said, “The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha.” They came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_16">16&#160;</span>They said to him, “See now, there are with your servants fifty strong men. Please let them go and seek your master. Perhaps Yahweh’s Spirit has taken him up, and put him on some mountain or into some valley.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Don’t send them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_17">17&#160;</span>When they urged him until he was ashamed, he said, “Send them.” </div>
<div class='p'>Therefore they sent fifty men; and they searched for three days, but didn’t find him. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_18">18&#160;</span>They came back to him while he stayed at Jericho; and he said to them, “Didn’t I tell you, ‘Don’t go?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_19">19&#160;</span>The men of the city said to Elisha, “Behold, please, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord sees; but the water is bad, and the land is barren.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_20">20&#160;</span>He said, “Bring me a new jar, and put salt in it.” Then they brought it to him. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_21">21&#160;</span>He went out to the spring of the waters, and threw salt into it, and said, “Yahweh says, ‘I have healed these waters. There shall not be from there any more death or barren wasteland.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="K22_22">22&#160;</span>So the waters were healed to this day, according to Elisha’s word which he spoke. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K22_23">23&#160;</span>He went up from there to Bethel. As he was going up by the way, some youths came out of the city and mocked him, and said to him, “Go up, you baldy! Go up, you baldy!” 
<span class="verse" id="K22_24">24&#160;</span>He looked behind him and saw them, and cursed them in Yahweh’s name. Then two female bears came out of the woods and mauled forty-two of those youths. 
<span class="verse" id="K22_25">25&#160;</span>He went from there to Mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Samaria.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K23_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_1">1&#160;</span>Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, but not like his father and like his mother, for he put away the pillar of Baal that his father had made. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_3">3&#160;</span>Nevertheless he held to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. He didn’t depart from them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_4">4&#160;</span>Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep breeder; and he supplied the king of Israel with one hundred thousand lambs and the wool of one hundred thousand rams. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_5">5&#160;</span>But when Ahab was dead, the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_6">6&#160;</span>King Jehoram went out of Samaria at that time, and mustered all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_7">7&#160;</span>He went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, “The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will you go with me against Moab to battle?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I will go up. I am as you are, my people as your people, my horses as your horses.” 
<span class="verse" id="K23_8">8&#160;</span>Then he said, “Which way shall we go up?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehoram answered, “The way of the wilderness of Edom.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_9">9&#160;</span>So the king of Israel went with the king of Judah and the king of Edom, and they marched for seven days along a circuitous route. There was no water for the army or for the animals that followed them. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_10">10&#160;</span>The king of Israel said, “Alas! For Yahweh has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_11">11&#160;</span>But Jehoshaphat said, “Isn’t there a prophet of Yahweh here, that we may inquire of Yahweh by him?” </div>
<div class='p'>One of the king of Israel’s servants answered, “Elisha the son of Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Elijah, is here.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_12">12&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat said, “Yahweh’s word is with him.” So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_13">13&#160;</span>Elisha said to the king of Israel, “What have I to do with you? Go to the prophets of your father, and to the prophets of your mother.” </div>
<div class='p'>The king of Israel said to him, “No, for Yahweh has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_14">14&#160;</span>Elisha said, “As Yahweh of Armies lives, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I respect the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward you, nor see you. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_15">15&#160;</span>But now bring me a musician.” When the musician played, Yahweh’s hand came on him. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_16">16&#160;</span>He said, “Yahweh says, ‘Make this valley full of trenches.’ 
<span class="verse" id="K23_17">17&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, ‘You will not see wind, neither will you see rain, yet that valley will be filled with water, and you will drink, both you and your livestock and your other animals. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_18">18&#160;</span>This is an easy thing in Yahweh’s sight. He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_19">19&#160;</span>You shall strike every fortified city and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all springs of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_20">20&#160;</span>In the morning, about the time of offering the sacrifice, behold, water came by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_21">21&#160;</span>Now when all the Moabites heard that the kings had come up to fight against them, they gathered themselves together, all who were able to put on armor, young and old, and stood on the border. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_22">22&#160;</span>They rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone on the water, and the Moabites saw the water opposite them as red as blood. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_23">23&#160;</span>They said, “This is blood. The kings are surely destroyed, and they have struck each other. Now therefore, Moab, to the plunder!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K23_24">24&#160;</span>When they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and struck the Moabites, so that they fled before them; and they went forward into the land attacking the Moabites. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_25">25&#160;</span>They beat down the cities; and on every good piece of land each man cast his stone, and filled it. They also stopped all the springs of water and cut down all the good trees, until in Kir Hareseth all they left was its stones; however the men armed with slings went around it and attacked it. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_26">26&#160;</span>When the king of Moab saw that the battle was too severe for him, he took with him seven hundred men who drew a sword, to break through to the king of Edom; but they could not. 
<span class="verse" id="K23_27">27&#160;</span>Then he took his oldest son who would have reigned in his place, and offered him for a burnt offering on the wall. There was great wrath against Israel; and they departed from him, and returned to their own land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K24_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_1">1&#160;</span>Now a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha, saying, “Your servant my husband is dead. You know that your servant feared Yahweh. Now the creditor has come to take for himself my two children to be slaves.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_2">2&#160;</span>Elisha said to her, “What should I do for you? Tell me, what do you have in the house?” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “Your servant has nothing in the house, except a pot of oil.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_3">3&#160;</span>Then he said, “Go, borrow empty containers from all your neighbors. Don’t borrow just a few containers. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_4">4&#160;</span>Go in and shut the door on you and on your sons, and pour oil into all those containers; and set aside those which are full.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_5">5&#160;</span>So she went from him, and shut the door on herself and on her sons. They brought the containers to her, and she poured oil. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_6">6&#160;</span>When the containers were full, she said to her son, “Bring me another container.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to her, “There isn’t another container.” Then the oil stopped flowing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_7">7&#160;</span>Then she came and told the man of God. He said, “Go, sell the oil, and pay your debt; and you and your sons live on the rest.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_8">8&#160;</span>One day Elisha went to Shunem, where there was a prominent woman; and she persuaded him to eat bread. So it was, that as often as he passed by, he turned in there to eat bread. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_9">9&#160;</span>She said to her husband, “See now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God who passes by us continually. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_10">10&#160;</span>Please, let’s make a little room on the roof. Let’s set a bed, a table, a chair, and a lamp stand for him there. When he comes to us, he can stay there.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_11">11&#160;</span>One day he came there, and he went to the room and lay there. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_12">12&#160;</span>He said to Gehazi his servant, “Call this Shunammite.” When he had called her, she stood before him. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_13">13&#160;</span>He said to him, “Say now to her, ‘Behold, you have cared for us with all this care. What is to be done for you? Would you like to be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the army?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>She answered, “I dwell among my own people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_14">14&#160;</span>He said, “What then is to be done for her?” </div>
<div class='p'>Gehazi answered, “Most certainly she has no son, and her husband is old.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_15">15&#160;</span>He said, “Call her.” When he had called her, she stood in the door. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_16">16&#160;</span>He said, “At this season next year, you will embrace a son.” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “No, my lord, you man of God, do not lie to your servant.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_17">17&#160;</span>The woman conceived, and bore a son at that season when the time came around, as Elisha had said to her. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_18">18&#160;</span>When the child was grown, one day he went out to his father to the reapers. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_19">19&#160;</span>He said to his father, “My head! My head!” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to his servant, “Carry him to his mother.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_20">20&#160;</span>When he had taken him and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees until noon, and then died. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_21">21&#160;</span>She went up and laid him on the man of God’s bed, and shut the door on him, and went out. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_22">22&#160;</span>She called to her husband and said, “Please send me one of the servants, and one of the donkeys, that I may run to the man of God and come again.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_23">23&#160;</span>He said, “Why would you want go to him today? It is not a new moon or a Sabbath.” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “It’s all right.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_24">24&#160;</span>Then she saddled a donkey, and said to her servant, “Drive, and go forward! Don’t slow down for me, unless I ask you to.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_25">25&#160;</span>So she went, and came to the man of God to Mount Carmel. When the man of God saw her afar off, he said to Gehazi his servant, “Behold, there is the Shunammite. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_26">26&#160;</span>Please run now to meet her, and ask her, ‘Is it well with you? Is it well with your husband? Is it well with your child?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>She answered, “It is well.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_27">27&#160;</span>When she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught hold of his feet. Gehazi came near to thrust her away; but the man of God said, “Leave her alone, for her soul is troubled within her; and Yahweh has hidden it from me, and has not told me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_28">28&#160;</span>Then she said, “Did I ask you for a son, my lord? Didn’t I say, ‘Do not deceive me’?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_29">29&#160;</span>Then he said to Gehazi, “Tuck your cloak into your belt, take my staff in your hand, and go your way. If you meet any man, don’t greet him; and if anyone greets you, don’t answer him again. Then lay my staff on the child’s face.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_30">30&#160;</span>The child’s mother said, “As Yahweh lives, and as your soul lives, I will not leave you.” </div>
<div class='p'>So he arose, and followed her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_31">31&#160;</span>Gehazi went ahead of them, and laid the staff on the child’s face; but there was no voice and no hearing. Therefore he returned to meet him, and told him, “The child has not awakened.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_32">32&#160;</span>When Elisha had come into the house, behold, the child was dead, and lying on his bed. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_33">33&#160;</span>He went in therefore, and shut the door on them both, and prayed to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_34">34&#160;</span>He went up and lay on the child, and put his mouth on his mouth, and his eyes on his eyes, and his hands on his hands. He stretched himself on him; and the child’s flesh grew warm. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_35">35&#160;</span>Then he returned, and walked in the house once back and forth, then went up and stretched himself out on him. Then the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_36">36&#160;</span>He called Gehazi, and said, “Call this Shunammite!” So he called her. </div>
<div class='p'>When she had come in to him, he said, “Take up your son.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_37">37&#160;</span>Then she went in, fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the ground; then she picked up her son, and went out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_38">38&#160;</span>Elisha came again to Gilgal. There was a famine in the land; and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him; and he said to his servant, “Get the large pot, and boil stew for the sons of the prophets.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_39">39&#160;</span>One went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered a lap full of wild gourds from it, and came and cut them up into the pot of stew; for they didn’t recognize them. 
<span class="verse" id="K24_40">40&#160;</span>So they poured out for the men to eat. As they were eating some of the stew, they cried out and said, “Man of God, there is death in the pot!” And they could not eat it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_41">41&#160;</span>But he said, “Then bring meal.” He threw it into the pot; and he said, “Serve it to the people, that they may eat.” And there was nothing harmful in the pot. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_42">42&#160;</span>A man from Baal Shalishah came, and brought the man of God some bread of the first fruits: twenty loaves of barley and fresh ears of grain in his sack. Elisha said, “Give to the people, that they may eat.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_43">43&#160;</span>His servant said, “What, should I set this before a hundred men?” </div>
<div class='p'>But he said, “Give it to the people, that they may eat; for Yahweh says, ‘They will eat, and will have some left over.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K24_44">44&#160;</span>So he set it before them and they ate and had some left over, according to Yahweh’s word.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K25_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_1">1&#160;</span>Now Naaman, captain of the army of the king of Syria, was a great man with his master, and honorable, because by him Yahweh had given victory to Syria; he was also a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_2">2&#160;</span>The Syrians had gone out in bands, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little girl, and she waited on Naaman’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_3">3&#160;</span>She said to her mistress, “I wish that my lord were with the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would heal him of his leprosy.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_4">4&#160;</span>Someone went in and told his lord, saying, “The girl who is from the land of Israel said this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_5">5&#160;</span>The king of Syria said, “Go now, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>He departed, and took with him ten talents<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver, six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of clothing. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_6">6&#160;</span>He brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, “Now when this letter has come to you, behold, I have sent Naaman my servant to you, that you may heal him of his leprosy.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_7">7&#160;</span>When the king of Israel had read the letter, he tore his clothes and said, “Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me to heal a man of his leprosy? But please consider and see how he seeks a quarrel against me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_8">8&#160;</span>It was so, when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, “Why have you torn your clothes? Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_9">9&#160;</span>So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariots, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_10">10&#160;</span>Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, “Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and your flesh shall come again to you, and you shall be clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_11">11&#160;</span>But Naaman was angry, and went away and said, “Behold, I thought, ‘He will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Yahweh his God, and wave his hand over the place, and heal the leper.’ 
<span class="verse" id="K25_12">12&#160;</span>Aren’t Abanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? Couldn’t I wash in them and be clean?” So he turned and went away in a rage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_13">13&#160;</span>His servants came near and spoke to him, and said, “My father, if the prophet had asked you do some great thing, wouldn’t you have done it? How much rather then, when he says to you, ‘Wash, and be clean?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_14">14&#160;</span>Then went he down and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God; and his flesh was restored like the flesh of a little child, and he was clean. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_15">15&#160;</span>He returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came, and stood before him; and he said, “See now, I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel. Now therefore, please take a gift from your servant.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_16">16&#160;</span>But he said, “As Yahweh lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none.” </div>
<div class='p'>He urged him to take it; but he refused. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_17">17&#160;</span>Naaman said, “If not, then, please let two mules’ load of earth be given to your servant; for your servant will from now on offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice to other gods, but to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_18">18&#160;</span>In this thing may Yahweh pardon your servant: when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon. When I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, may Yahweh pardon your servant in this thing.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_19">19&#160;</span>He said to him, “Go in peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>So he departed from him a little way. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_20">20&#160;</span>But Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, “Behold, my master has spared this Naaman the Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought. As Yahweh lives, I will run after him, and take something from him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_21">21&#160;</span>So Gehazi followed after Naaman. When Naaman saw one running after him, he came down from the chariot to meet him, and said, “Is all well?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_22">22&#160;</span>He said, “All is well. My master has sent me, saying, ‘Behold, even now two young men of the sons of the prophets have come to me from the hill country of Ephraim. Please give them a talent<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of silver and two changes of clothing.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_23">23&#160;</span>Naaman said, “Be pleased to take two talents.” He urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of clothing, and laid them on two of his servants; and they carried them before him. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_24">24&#160;</span>When he came to the hill, he took them from their hand, and stored them in the house. Then he let the men go, and they departed. 
<span class="verse" id="K25_25">25&#160;</span>But he went in, and stood before his master. Elisha said to him, “Where did you come from, Gehazi?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Your servant went nowhere.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K25_26">26&#160;</span>He said to him, “Didn’t my heart go with you when the man turned from his chariot to meet you? Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and olive groves and vineyards, and sheep and cattle, and male servants and female servants? 
<span class="verse" id="K25_27">27&#160;</span>Therefore the leprosy of Naaman will cling to you and to your offspring<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>He went out from his presence a leper, as white as snow.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K26_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_1">1&#160;</span>The sons of the prophets said to Elisha, “See now, the place where we live and meet with you is too small for us. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_2">2&#160;</span>Please let us go to the Jordan, and each man take a beam from there, and let’s make us a place there, where we may live.” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “Go!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_3">3&#160;</span>One said, “Please be pleased to go with your servants.” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “I will go.” 
<span class="verse" id="K26_4">4&#160;</span>So he went with them. When they came to the Jordan, they cut down wood. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_5">5&#160;</span>But as one was cutting down a tree, the ax head fell into the water. Then he cried out and said, “Alas, my master! For it was borrowed.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_6">6&#160;</span>The man of God asked, “Where did it fall?” He showed him the place. He cut down a stick, threw it in there, and made the iron float. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_7">7&#160;</span>He said, “Take it.” So he put out his hand and took it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_8">8&#160;</span>Now the king of Syria was at war against Israel; and he took counsel with his servants, saying, “My camp will be in such and such a place.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_9">9&#160;</span>The man of God sent to the king of Israel, saying, “Beware that you not pass this place, for the Syrians are coming down there.” 
<span class="verse" id="K26_10">10&#160;</span>The king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of; and he saved himself there, not once or twice. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_11">11&#160;</span>The king of Syria’s heart was very troubled about this. He called his servants, and said to them, “Won’t you show me which of us is for the king of Israel?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_12">12&#160;</span>One of his servants said, “No, my lord, O king; but Elisha, the prophet who is in Israel, tells the king of Israel the words that you speak in your bedroom.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_13">13&#160;</span>He said, “Go and see where he is, that I may send and get him.” </div>
<div class='p'>He was told, “Behold, he is in Dothan.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore he sent horses, chariots, and a great army there. They came by night and surrounded the city. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_15">15&#160;</span>When the servant of the man of God had risen early and gone out, behold, an army with horses and chariots was around the city. His servant said to him, “Alas, my master! What shall we do?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_16">16&#160;</span>He answered, “Don’t be afraid, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.” 
<span class="verse" id="K26_17">17&#160;</span>Elisha prayed, and said, “Yahweh, please open his eyes, that he may see.” Yahweh opened the young man’s eyes, and he saw; and behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire around Elisha. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_18">18&#160;</span>When they came down to him, Elisha prayed to Yahweh, and said, “Please strike this people with blindness.” </div>
<div class='p'>He struck them with blindness according to Elisha’s word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_19">19&#160;</span>Elisha said to them, “This is not the way, neither is this the city. Follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom you seek.” He led them to Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_20">20&#160;</span>When they had come into Samaria, Elisha said, “Yahweh, open these men’s eyes, that they may see.” </div>
<div class='p'>Yahweh opened their eyes, and they saw; and behold, they were in the middle of Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_21">21&#160;</span>The king of Israel said to Elisha, when he saw them, “My father, shall I strike them? Shall I strike them?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_22">22&#160;</span>He answered, “You shall not strike them. Would you strike those whom you have taken captive with your sword and with your bow? Set bread and water before them, that they may eat and drink, then go to their master.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_23">23&#160;</span>He prepared a great feast for them. After they ate and drank, he sent them away and they went to their master. So the bands of Syria stopped raiding the land of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_24">24&#160;</span>After this, Benhadad king of Syria gathered all his army, and went up and besieged Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_25">25&#160;</span>There was a great famine in Samaria. Behold, they besieged it until a donkey’s head was sold for eighty pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a kab<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of dove’s dung for five pieces of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_26">26&#160;</span>As the king of Israel was passing by on the wall, a woman cried to him, saying, “Help, my lord, O king!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_27">27&#160;</span>He said, “If Yahweh doesn’t help you, where could I get help for you? From of the threshing floor, or from the wine press?” 
<span class="verse" id="K26_28">28&#160;</span>Then the king asked her, “What is your problem?” </div>
<div class='p'>She answered, “This woman said to me, ‘Give your son, that we may eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.’ 
<span class="verse" id="K26_29">29&#160;</span>So we boiled my son and ate him; and I said to her on the next day, ‘Give up your son, that we may eat him;’ and she has hidden her son.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_30">30&#160;</span>When the king heard the words of the woman, he tore his clothes. Now he was passing by on the wall, and the people looked, and behold, he had sackcloth underneath on his body. 
<span class="verse" id="K26_31">31&#160;</span>Then he said, “God do so to me, and more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat stays on him today.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_32">32&#160;</span>But Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. Then the king sent a man from before him; but before the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, “Do you see how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my head? Behold, when the messenger comes, shut the door, and hold the door shut against him. Isn’t the sound of his master’s feet behind him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K26_33">33&#160;</span>While he was still talking with them, behold, the messenger came down to him. Then he said, “Behold, this evil is from Yahweh. Why should I wait for Yahweh any longer?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K27_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_1">1&#160;</span>Elisha said, “Hear Yahweh’s word. Yahweh says, ‘Tomorrow about this time a seah<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour will be sold for a shekel,<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and two seahs of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_2">2&#160;</span>Then the captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said, “Behold, if Yahweh made windows in heaven, could this thing be?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Behold, you will see it with your eyes, but will not eat of it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_3">3&#160;</span>Now there were four leprous men at the entrance of the gate. They said to one another, “Why do we sit here until we die? 
<span class="verse" id="K27_4">4&#160;</span>If we say, ‘We will enter into the city,’ then the famine is in the city, and we will die there. If we sit still here, we also die. Now therefore come, and let’s surrender to the army of the Syrians. If they save us alive, we will live; and if they kill us, we will only die.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_5">5&#160;</span>They rose up in the twilight to go to the camp of the Syrians. When they had come to the outermost part of the camp of the Syrians, behold, no man was there. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_6">6&#160;</span>For the Lord<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> had made the army of the Syrians to hear the sound of chariots and the sound of horses, even the noise of a great army; and they said to one another, “Behold, the king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites and the kings of the Egyptians to attack us.” 
<span class="verse" id="K27_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, their horses, and their donkeys, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_8">8&#160;</span>When these lepers came to the outermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and ate and drank, then carried away silver, gold, and clothing and went and hid it. Then they came back, and entered into another tent and carried things from there also, and went and hid them. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_9">9&#160;</span>Then they said to one another, “We aren’t doing right. Today is a day of good news, and we keep silent. If we wait until the morning light, punishment will overtake us. Now therefore come, let’s go and tell the king’s household.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_10">10&#160;</span>So they came and called to the city gatekeepers; and they told them, “We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold, there was no man there, not even a man’s voice, but the horses tied, and the donkeys tied, and the tents as they were.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_11">11&#160;</span>Then the gatekeepers called out and told it to the king’s household within. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_12">12&#160;</span>The king arose in the night, and said to his servants, “I will now show you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry. Therefore they have gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying, ‘When they come out of the city, we shall take them alive, and get into the city.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_13">13&#160;</span>One of his servants answered, “Please let some people take five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city. Behold, they are like all the multitude of Israel who are left in it. Behold, they are like all the multitude of Israel who are consumed. Let’s send and see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore they took two chariots with horses; and the king sent them out to the Syrian army, saying, “Go and see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K27_15">15&#160;</span>They went after them to the Jordan; and behold, all the path was full of garments and equipment which the Syrians had cast away in their haste. The messengers returned and told the king. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_16">16&#160;</span>The people went out and plundered the camp of the Syrians. So a seah<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel,<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> according to Yahweh’s word. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_17">17&#160;</span>The king had appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to be in charge of the gate; and the people trampled over him in the gate, and he died as the man of God had said, who spoke when the king came down to him. 
<span class="verse" id="K27_18">18&#160;</span>It happened as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, “Two seahs<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of barley for a shekel,<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> and a seah of fine flour for a shekel, shall be tomorrow about this time in the gate of Samaria;” 
<span class="verse" id="K27_19">19&#160;</span>and that captain answered the man of God, and said, “Now, behold, if Yahweh made windows in heaven, might such a thing be?” and he said, “Behold, you will see it with your eyes, but will not eat of it.” 
<span class="verse" id="K27_20">20&#160;</span>It happened like that to him, for the people trampled over him in the gate, and he died.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K28_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_1">1&#160;</span>Now Elisha had spoken to the woman whose son he had restored to life, saying, “Arise, and go, you and your household, and stay for a while wherever you can; for Yahweh has called for a famine. It will also come on the land for seven years.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_2">2&#160;</span>The woman arose, and did according to the man of God’s word. She went with her household, and lived in the land of the Philistines for seven years. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_3">3&#160;</span>At the end of seven years, the woman returned from the land of the Philistines. Then she went out to beg the king for her house and for her land. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_4">4&#160;</span>Now the king was talking with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, “Please tell me all the great things that Elisha has done.” 
<span class="verse" id="K28_5">5&#160;</span>As he was telling the king how he had restored to life him who was dead, behold, the woman whose son he had restored to life begged the king for her house and for her land. Gehazi said, “My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_6">6&#160;</span>When the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed to her a certain officer, saying, “Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_7">7&#160;</span>Elisha came to Damascus; and Benhadad the king of Syria was sick. He was told, “The man of God has come here.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_8">8&#160;</span>The king said to Hazael, “Take a present in your hand, and go meet the man of God, and inquire of Yahweh by him, saying, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_9">9&#160;</span>So Hazael went to meet him and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels’ burden, and came and stood before him and said, “Your son Benhadad king of Syria has sent me to you, saying, ‘Will I recover from this sickness?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_10">10&#160;</span>Elisha said to him, “Go, tell him, ‘You will surely recover;’ however Yahweh has shown me that he will surely die.” 
<span class="verse" id="K28_11">11&#160;</span>He settled his gaze steadfastly on him, until he was ashamed. Then the man of God wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_12">12&#160;</span>Hazael said, “Why do you weep, my lord?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “Because I know the evil that you will do to the children of Israel. You will set their strongholds on fire, and you will kill their young men with the sword, and will dash their little ones in pieces, and rip up their pregnant women.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_13">13&#160;</span>Hazael said, “But what is your servant, who is but a dog, that he could do this great thing?” </div>
<div class='p'>Elisha answered, “Yahweh has shown me that you will be king over Syria.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_14">14&#160;</span>Then he departed from Elisha, and came to his master, who said to him, “What did Elisha say to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “He told me that you would surely recover.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_15">15&#160;</span>On the next day, he took a thick cloth, dipped it in water, and spread it on the king’s face, so that he died. Then Hazael reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_16">16&#160;</span>In the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being king of Judah then, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_17">17&#160;</span>He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign. He reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_18">18&#160;</span>He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did Ahab’s house, for he married Ahab’s daughter. He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_19">19&#160;</span>However, Yahweh would not destroy Judah, for David his servant’s sake, as he promised him to give to him a lamp for his children always. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_20">20&#160;</span>In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_21">21&#160;</span>Then Joram crossed over to Zair, and all his chariots with him; and he rose up by night and struck the Edomites who surrounded him with the captains of the chariots; and the people fled to their tents. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_22">22&#160;</span>So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_23">23&#160;</span>The rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K28_24">24&#160;</span>Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s city; and Ahaziah his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_25">25&#160;</span>In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_26">26&#160;</span>Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_27">27&#160;</span>He walked in the way of Ahab’s house and did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, as did Ahab’s house, for he was the son-in-law of Ahab’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K28_28">28&#160;</span>He went with Joram the son of Ahab to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth Gilead, and the Syrians wounded Joram. 
<span class="verse" id="K28_29">29&#160;</span>King Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel from the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. Ahaziah the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K29_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_1">1&#160;</span>Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets, and said to him, “Put your belt on your waist, take this vial of oil in your hand, and go to Ramoth Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_2">2&#160;</span>When you come there, find Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in and make him rise up from among his brothers, and take him to an inner room. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_3">3&#160;</span>Then take the vial of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, ‘Yahweh says, “I have anointed you king over Israel.” ’ Then open the door, flee, and don’t wait.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_4">4&#160;</span>So the young man, the young prophet, went to Ramoth Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_5">5&#160;</span>When he came, behold, the captains of the army were sitting. Then he said, “I have a message for you, captain.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehu said, “To which one of us?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “To you, O captain.” 
<span class="verse" id="K29_6">6&#160;</span>He arose, and went into the house. Then he poured the oil on his head, and said to him, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘I have anointed you king over the people of Yahweh, even over Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_7">7&#160;</span>You must strike your master Ahab’s house, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of Yahweh, at the hand of Jezebel. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_8">8&#160;</span>For the whole house of Ahab will perish. I will cut off from Ahab everyone who urinates against a wall,<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> both him who is shut up and him who is left at large in Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_9">9&#160;</span>I will make Ahab’s house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_10">10&#160;</span>The dogs will eat Jezebel on the plot of ground of Jezreel, and there shall be no one to bury her.’ ” Then he opened the door and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_11">11&#160;</span>When Jehu came out to the servants of his lord and one said to him, “Is all well? Why did this madman come to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to them, “You know the man and how he talks.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_12">12&#160;</span>They said, “That is a lie. Tell us now.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “He said to me, ‘Yahweh says, I have anointed you king over Israel.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_13">13&#160;</span>Then they hurried, and each man took his cloak, and put it under him on the top of the stairs, and blew the trumpet, saying, “Jehu is king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_14">14&#160;</span>So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. (Now Joram was defending Ramoth Gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria; 
<span class="verse" id="K29_15">15&#160;</span>but king Joram had returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him when he fought with Hazael king of Syria.) Jehu said, “If this is your thinking, then let no one escape and go out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.” 
<span class="verse" id="K29_16">16&#160;</span>So Jehu rode in a chariot and went to Jezreel, for Joram lay there. Ahaziah king of Judah had come down to see Joram. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_17">17&#160;</span>Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came, and said, “I see a company.” </div>
<div class='p'>Joram said, “Take a horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, ‘Is it peace?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_18">18&#160;</span>So one went on horseback to meet him, and said, “the king says, ‘Is it peace?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehu said, “What do you have to do with peace? Fall in behind me!” </div>
<div class='p'>The watchman said, “The messenger came to them, but he isn’t coming back.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_19">19&#160;</span>Then he sent out a second on horseback, who came to them and said, “The king says, ‘Is it peace?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehu answered, “What do you have to do with peace? Fall in behind me!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_20">20&#160;</span>The watchman said, “He came to them, and isn’t coming back. The driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_21">21&#160;</span>Joram said, “Get ready!” </div>
<div class='p'>They got his chariot ready. Then Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot; and they went out to meet Jehu, and found him on Naboth the Jezreelite’s land. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_22">22&#160;</span>When Joram saw Jehu, he said, “Is it peace, Jehu?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “What peace, so long as the prostitution of your mother Jezebel and her witchcraft abound?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_23">23&#160;</span>Joram turned his hands and fled, and said to Ahaziah, “This is treason, Ahaziah!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_24">24&#160;</span>Jehu drew his bow with his full strength, and struck Joram between his arms; and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his chariot. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_25">25&#160;</span>Then Jehu said to Bidkar his captain, “Pick him up, and throw him in the plot of the field of Naboth the Jezreelite; for remember how, when you and I rode together after Ahab his father, Yahweh laid this burden on him: 
<span class="verse" id="K29_26">26&#160;</span>‘Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons,’ says Yahweh; ‘and I will repay you in this plot of ground,’ says Yahweh. Now therefore take and cast him onto the plot of ground, according to Yahweh’s word.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_27">27&#160;</span>But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden house. Jehu followed after him, and said, “Strike him also in the chariot!” They struck him at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. He fled to Megiddo, and died there. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_28">28&#160;</span>His servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his tomb with his fathers in David’s city. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_29">29&#160;</span>In the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab, Ahaziah began to reign over Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_30">30&#160;</span>When Jehu had come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it; and she painted her eyes, and adorned her head, and looked out at the window. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_31">31&#160;</span>As Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, “Do you come in peace, Zimri, you murderer of your master?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_32">32&#160;</span>He lifted up his face to the window, and said, “Who is on my side? Who?” </div>
<div class='p'>Two or three eunuchs looked out at him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_33">33&#160;</span>He said, “Throw her down!” </div>
<div class='p'>So they threw her down; and some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses. Then he trampled her under foot. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_34">34&#160;</span>When he had come in, he ate and drank. Then he said, “See now to this cursed woman, and bury her; for she is a king’s daughter.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K29_35">35&#160;</span>They went to bury her, but they found no more of her than the skull, the feet, and the palms of her hands. 
<span class="verse" id="K29_36">36&#160;</span>Therefore they came back, and told him. </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “This is Yahweh’s word, which he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, ‘The dogs will eat the flesh of Jezebel on the plot of Jezreel, 
<span class="verse" id="K29_37">37&#160;</span>and the body of Jezebel will be as dung on the surface of the field on Jezreel’s land, so that they won’t say, “This is Jezebel.” ’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K210_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_1">1&#160;</span>Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. Jehu wrote letters and sent them to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, even the elders, and to those who brought up Ahab’s sons, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K210_2">2&#160;</span>“Now as soon as this letter comes to you, since your master’s sons are with you, and you have chariots and horses, a fortified city also, and armor, 
<span class="verse" id="K210_3">3&#160;</span>select the best and fittest of your master’s sons, set him on his father’s throne, and fight for your master’s house.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_4">4&#160;</span>But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, “Behold, the two kings didn’t stand before him! How then shall we stand?” 
<span class="verse" id="K210_5">5&#160;</span>He who was over the household, and he who was over the city, the elders also, and those who raised the children, sent to Jehu, saying, “We are your servants, and will do all that you ask us. We will not make any man king. You do that which is good in your eyes.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_6">6&#160;</span>Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, “If you are on my side, and if you will listen to my voice, take the heads of the men who are your master’s sons, and come to me to Jezreel by tomorrow this time.” </div>
<div class='p'>Now the king’s sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city, who brought them up. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_7">7&#160;</span>When the letter came to them, they took the king’s sons and killed them, even seventy people, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to him to Jezreel. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_8">8&#160;</span>A messenger came and told him, “They have brought the heads of the king’s sons.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Lay them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until the morning.” 
<span class="verse" id="K210_9">9&#160;</span>In the morning, he went out and stood, and said to all the people, “You are righteous. Behold, I conspired against my master and killed him, but who killed all these? 
<span class="verse" id="K210_10">10&#160;</span>Know now that nothing will fall to the earth of Yahweh’s word, which Yahweh spoke concerning Ahab’s house. For Yahweh has done that which he spoke by his servant Elijah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_11">11&#160;</span>So Jehu struck all that remained of Ahab’s house in Jezreel, with all his great men, his familiar friends, and his priests, until he left him no one remaining. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_12">12&#160;</span>He arose and departed, and went to Samaria. As he was at the shearing house of the shepherds on the way, 
<span class="verse" id="K210_13">13&#160;</span>Jehu met with the brothers of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, “Who are you?” </div>
<div class='p'>They answered, “We are the brothers of Ahaziah. We are going down to greet the children of the king and the children of the queen.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_14">14&#160;</span>He said, “Take them alive!” </div>
<div class='p'>They took them alive, and killed them at the pit of the shearing house, even forty-two men. He didn’t leave any of them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_15">15&#160;</span>When he had departed from there, he met Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him. He greeted him, and said to him, “Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehonadab answered, “It is.” </div>
<div class='p'>“If it is, give me your hand.” He gave him his hand; and he took him up to him into the chariot. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_16">16&#160;</span>He said, “Come with me, and see my zeal for Yahweh.” So they made him ride in his chariot. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_17">17&#160;</span>When he came to Samaria, he struck all who remained to Ahab in Samaria, until he had destroyed them, according to Yahweh’s word which he spoke to Elijah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_18">18&#160;</span>Jehu gathered all the people together, and said to them, “Ahab served Baal a little, but Jehu will serve him much. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_19">19&#160;</span>Now therefore call to me all the prophets of Baal, all of his worshipers, and all of his priests. Let no one be absent, for I have a great sacrifice to Baal. Whoever is absent, he shall not live.” But Jehu did deceptively, intending to destroy the worshipers of Baal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_20">20&#160;</span>Jehu said, “Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal!” </div>
<div class='p'>So they proclaimed it. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_21">21&#160;</span>Jehu sent through all Israel; and all the worshipers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left that didn’t come. They came into the house of Baal; and the house of Baal was filled from one end to another. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_22">22&#160;</span>He said to him who kept the wardrobe, “Bring out robes for all the worshipers of Baal!” </div>
<div class='p'>So he brought robes out to them. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_23">23&#160;</span>Jehu went with Jehonadab the son of Rechab into the house of Baal. Then he said to the worshipers of Baal, “Search, and see that none of the servants of Yahweh are here with you, but only the worshipers of Baal.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_24">24&#160;</span>So they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had appointed for himself eighty men outside, and said, “If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escape, he who lets him go, his life shall be for the life of him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_25">25&#160;</span>As soon as he had finished offering the burnt offering, Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, “Go in and kill them! Let no one escape.” So they struck them with the edge of the sword. The guard and the captains threw the bodies out, and went to the inner shrine of the house of Baal. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_26">26&#160;</span>They brought out the pillars that were in the house of Baal and burned them. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_27">27&#160;</span>They broke down the pillar of Baal, and broke down the house of Baal, and made it a latrine, to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_28">28&#160;</span>Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_29">29&#160;</span>However, Jehu didn’t depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin—the golden calves that were in Bethel and that were in Dan. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_30">30&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Jehu, “Because you have done well in executing that which is right in my eyes, and have done to Ahab’s house according to all that was in my heart, your descendants shall sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth generation.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_31">31&#160;</span>But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of Yahweh, the God of Israel, with all his heart. He didn’t depart from the sins of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K210_32">32&#160;</span>In those days Yahweh began to cut away parts of Israel; and Hazael struck them in all the borders of Israel 
<span class="verse" id="K210_33">33&#160;</span>from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_34">34&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K210_35">35&#160;</span>Jehu slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria. Jehoahaz his son reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K210_36">36&#160;</span>The time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K211_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_1">1&#160;</span>Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal offspring. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_2">2&#160;</span>But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the king’s sons who were slain, even him and his nurse, and put them in the bedroom; and they hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not slain. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_3">3&#160;</span>He was with her hidden in Yahweh’s house six years while Athaliah reigned over the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_4">4&#160;</span>In the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the captains over hundreds of the Carites and of the guard, and brought them to him into Yahweh’s house; and he made a covenant with them, and made a covenant with them in Yahweh’s house, and showed them the king’s son. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_5">5&#160;</span>He commanded them, saying, “This is what you must do: a third of you, who come in on the Sabbath, shall be keepers of the watch of the king’s house; 
<span class="verse" id="K211_6">6&#160;</span>a third of you shall be at the gate Sur; and a third of you at the gate behind the guard. So you shall keep the watch of the house, and be a barrier. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_7">7&#160;</span>The two companies of you, even all who go out on the Sabbath, shall keep the watch of Yahweh’s house around the king. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_8">8&#160;</span>You shall surround the king, every man with his weapons in his hand; and he who comes within the ranks, let him be slain. Be with the king when he goes out, and when he comes in.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_9">9&#160;</span>The captains over hundreds did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded; and they each took his men, those who were to come in on the Sabbath with those who were to go out on the Sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_10">10&#160;</span>The priest delivered to the captains over hundreds the spears and shields that had been king David’s, which were in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_11">11&#160;</span>The guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, around the king. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_12">12&#160;</span>Then he brought out the king’s son, and put the crown on him, and gave him the covenant; and they made him king and anointed him; and they clapped their hands, and said, “Long live the king!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_13">13&#160;</span>When Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into Yahweh’s house; 
<span class="verse" id="K211_14">14&#160;</span>and she looked, and behold, the king stood by the pillar, as the tradition was, with the captains and the trumpets by the king; and all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes and cried, “Treason! Treason!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_15">15&#160;</span>Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds who were set over the army, and said to them, “Bring her out between the ranks. Kill anyone who follows her with the sword.” For the priest said, “Don’t let her be slain in Yahweh’s house.” 
<span class="verse" id="K211_16">16&#160;</span>So they seized her; and she went by the way of the horses’ entry to the king’s house, and she was slain there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_17">17&#160;</span>Jehoiada made a covenant between Yahweh and the king and the people, that they should be Yahweh’s people; also between the king and the people. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_18">18&#160;</span>All the people of the land went to the house of Baal, and broke it down. They broke his altars and his images in pieces thoroughly, and killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. The priest appointed officers over Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_19">19&#160;</span>He took the captains over hundreds, and the Carites, and the guard, and all the people of the land; and they brought down the king from Yahweh’s house, and came by the way of the gate of the guard to the king’s house. He sat on the throne of the kings. 
<span class="verse" id="K211_20">20&#160;</span>So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet. They had slain Athaliah with the sword at the king’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K211_21">21&#160;</span>Jehoash was seven years old when he began to reign.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K212_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_1">1&#160;</span>Jehoash began to reign in the seventh year of Jehu, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah of Beersheba. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_2">2&#160;</span>Jehoash did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes all his days in which Jehoiada the priest instructed him. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_3">3&#160;</span>However, the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_4">4&#160;</span>Jehoash said to the priests, “All the money of the holy things that is brought into Yahweh’s house, in current money, the money of the people for whom each man is evaluated,<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> and all the money that it comes into any man’s heart to bring into Yahweh’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="K212_5">5&#160;</span>let the priests take it to them, each man from his donor; and they shall repair the damage to the house, wherever any damage is found.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_6">6&#160;</span>But it was so, that in the twenty-third year of King Jehoash the priests had not repaired the damage to the house. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_7">7&#160;</span>Then King Jehoash called for Jehoiada the priest, and for the other priests, and said to them, “Why aren’t you repairing the damage to the house? Now therefore take no more money from your treasurers, but deliver it for repair of the damage to the house.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_8">8&#160;</span>The priests consented that they should take no more money from the people, and not repair the damage to the house. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_9">9&#160;</span>But Jehoiada the priest took a chest and bored a hole in its lid, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one comes into Yahweh’s house; and the priests who kept the threshold put all the money that was brought into Yahweh’s house into it. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_10">10&#160;</span>When they saw that there was much money in the chest, the king’s scribe and the high priest came up, and they put it in bags and counted the money that was found in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_11">11&#160;</span>They gave the money that was weighed out into the hands of those who did the work, who had the oversight of Yahweh’s house; and they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders who worked on Yahweh’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="K212_12">12&#160;</span>and to the masons and the stone cutters, and for buying timber and cut stone to repair the damage to Yahweh’s house, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_13">13&#160;</span>But there were not made for Yahweh’s house cups of silver, snuffers, basins, trumpets, any vessels of gold or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into Yahweh’s house; 
<span class="verse" id="K212_14">14&#160;</span>for they gave that to those who did the work, and repaired Yahweh’s house with it. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_15">15&#160;</span>Moreover they didn’t demand an accounting from the men into whose hand they delivered the money to give to those who did the work; for they dealt faithfully. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_16">16&#160;</span>The money for the trespass offerings and the money for the sin offerings was not brought into Yahweh’s house. It was the priests’. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_17">17&#160;</span>Then Hazael king of Syria went up and fought against Gath, and took it; and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_18">18&#160;</span>Jehoash king of Judah took all the holy things that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own holy things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of Yahweh’s house, and of the king’s house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria; and he went away from Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K212_19">19&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K212_20">20&#160;</span>His servants arose and made a conspiracy, and struck Joash at the house of Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla. 
<span class="verse" id="K212_21">21&#160;</span>For Jozacar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, struck him, and he died; and they buried him with his fathers in David’s city; and Amaziah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K213_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_1">1&#160;</span>In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria for seventeen years. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. He didn’t depart from it. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh’s anger burned against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, continually. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_4">4&#160;</span>Jehoahaz begged Yahweh, and Yahweh listened to him; for he saw the oppression of Israel, how the king of Syria oppressed them. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_5">5&#160;</span>(Yahweh gave Israel a savior, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians; and the children of Israel lived in their tents as before. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_6">6&#160;</span>Nevertheless they didn’t depart from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin, but walked in them; and the Asherah also remained in Samaria.) 
<span class="verse" id="K213_7">7&#160;</span>For he didn’t leave to Jehoahaz of the people any more than fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen; for the king of Syria destroyed them and made them like the dust in threshing. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_8">8&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K213_9">9&#160;</span>Jehoahaz slept with his fathers; and they buried him in Samaria; and Joash his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_10">10&#160;</span>In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria for sixteen years. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_11">11&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. He didn’t depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin; but he walked in them. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_12">12&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his might with which he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K213_13">13&#160;</span>Joash slept with his fathers; and Jeroboam sat on his throne. Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_14">14&#160;</span>Now Elisha became sick with the illness of which he died; and Joash the king of Israel came down to him, and wept over him, and said, “My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and its horsemen!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_15">15&#160;</span>Elisha said to him, “Take bow and arrows;” and he took bow and arrows for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_16">16&#160;</span>He said to the king of Israel, “Put your hand on the bow;” and he put his hand on it. Elisha laid his hands on the king’s hands. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_17">17&#160;</span>He said, “Open the window eastward;” and he opened it. Then Elisha said, “Shoot!” and he shot. He said, “Yahweh’s arrow of victory, even the arrow of victory over Syria; for you will strike the Syrians in Aphek until you have consumed them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_18">18&#160;</span>He said, “Take the arrows;” and he took them. He said to the king of Israel, “Strike the ground;” and he struck three times, and stopped. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_19">19&#160;</span>The man of God was angry with him, and said, “You should have struck five or six times. Then you would have struck Syria until you had consumed it, but now you will strike Syria just three times.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_20">20&#160;</span>Elisha died, and they buried him. </div>
<div class='p'>Now the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_21">21&#160;</span>As they were burying a man, behold, they saw a band of raiders; and they threw the man into Elisha’s tomb. As soon as the man touched Elisha’s bones, he revived, and stood up on his feet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_22">22&#160;</span>Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_23">23&#160;</span>But Yahweh was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, and favored them because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them and he didn’t cast them from his presence as yet. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K213_24">24&#160;</span>Hazael king of Syria died; and Benhadad his son reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K213_25">25&#160;</span>Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz took again out of the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Joash struck him three times, and recovered the cities of Israel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K214_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_1">1&#160;</span>In the second year of Joash, son of Joahaz, king of Israel, Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_2">2&#160;</span>He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign; and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_3">3&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, yet not like David his father. He did according to all that Joash his father had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_4">4&#160;</span>However the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_5">5&#160;</span>As soon as the kingdom was established in his hand, he killed his servants who had slain the king his father, 
<span class="verse" id="K214_6">6&#160;</span>but the children of the murderers he didn’t put to death, according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, as Yahweh commanded, saying, “The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers; but every man shall die for his own sin.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_7">7&#160;</span>He killed ten thousand Edomites in the Valley of Salt, and took Sela by war, and called its name Joktheel, to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_8">8&#160;</span>Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come, let’s look one another in the face.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_9">9&#160;</span>Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, “The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as wife.’ Then a wild animal that was in Lebanon passed by, and trampled down the thistle. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_10">10&#160;</span>You have indeed struck Edom, and your heart has lifted you up. Enjoy the glory of it, and stay at home; for why should you meddle to your harm, that you fall, even you, and Judah with you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_11">11&#160;</span>But Amaziah would not listen. So Jehoash king of Israel went up; and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth Shemesh, which belongs to Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_12">12&#160;</span>Judah was defeated by Israel; and each man fled to his tent. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_13">13&#160;</span>Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth Shemesh and came to Jerusalem, then broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="K214_14">14&#160;</span>He took all the gold and silver and all the vessels that were found in Yahweh’s house and in the treasures of the king’s house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_15">15&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K214_16">16&#160;</span>Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; and Jeroboam his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_17">17&#160;</span>Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel, fifteen years. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_18">18&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K214_19">19&#160;</span>They made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish; but they sent after him to Lachish and killed him there. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_20">20&#160;</span>They brought him on horses, and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in David’s city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_21">21&#160;</span>All the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the place of his father Amaziah. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_22">22&#160;</span>He built Elath and restored it to Judah. After that the king slept with his fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K214_23">23&#160;</span>In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria for forty-one years. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_24">24&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. He didn’t depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_25">25&#160;</span>He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath to the sea of the Arabah, according to Yahweh, the God of Israel’s word, which he spoke by his servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was from Gath Hepher. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_26">26&#160;</span>For Yahweh saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter for all, slave and free; and there was no helper for Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_27">27&#160;</span>Yahweh didn’t say that he would blot out the name of Israel from under the sky; but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash. 
<span class="verse" id="K214_28">28&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he fought, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which had belonged to Judah, for Israel, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K214_29">29&#160;</span>Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel; and Zechariah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K215_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_1">1&#160;</span>In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_2">2&#160;</span>He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_3">3&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, according to all that his father Amaziah had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_4">4&#160;</span>However, the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh struck the king, so that he was a leper to the day of his death, and lived in a separate house. Jotham, the king’s son, was over the household, judging the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_6">6&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K215_7">7&#160;</span>Azariah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in David’s city; and Jotham his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_8">8&#160;</span>In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_9">9&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, as his fathers had done. He didn’t depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_10">10&#160;</span>Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and struck him before the people and killed him, and reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_11">11&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_12">12&#160;</span>This was Yahweh’s word which he spoke to Jehu, saying, “Your sons to the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.” So it came to pass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_13">13&#160;</span>Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, and he reigned for a month in Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_14">14&#160;</span>Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, came to Samaria, struck Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, killed him, and reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_15">15&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_16">16&#160;</span>Then Menahem attacked Tiphsah and all who were in it and its border areas, from Tirzah. He attacked it because they didn’t open their gates to him, and he ripped up all their women who were with child. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_17">17&#160;</span>In the thirty ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi began to reign over Israel for ten years in Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_18">18&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. He didn’t depart all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_19">19&#160;</span>Pul the king of Assyria came against the land, and Menahem gave Pul one thousand talents<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver, that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_20">20&#160;</span>Menahem exacted the money from Israel, even from all the mighty men of wealth, from each man fifty shekels<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and didn’t stay there in the land. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_21">21&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="K215_22">22&#160;</span>Menahem slept with his fathers, and Pekahiah his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_23">23&#160;</span>In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria for two years. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_24">24&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. He didn’t depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_25">25&#160;</span>Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him and attacked him in Samaria, in the fortress of the king’s house, with Argob and Arieh; and with him were fifty men of the Gileadites. He killed him, and reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_26">26&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_27">27&#160;</span>In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria for twenty years. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_28">28&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. He didn’t depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_29">29&#160;</span>In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria came and took Ijon, Abel Beth Maacah, Janoah, Kedesh, Hazor, Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali; and he carried them captive to Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_30">30&#160;</span>Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, attacked him, killed him, and reigned in his place, in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_31">31&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K215_32">32&#160;</span>In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_33">33&#160;</span>He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_34">34&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes. He did according to all that his father Uzziah had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_35">35&#160;</span>However the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. He built the upper gate of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_36">36&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K215_37">37&#160;</span>In those days, Yahweh began to send Rezin the king of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah against Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="K215_38">38&#160;</span>Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in his father David’s city; and Ahaz his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K216_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K216_1">1&#160;</span>In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_2">2&#160;</span>Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He didn’t do that which was right in Yahweh his God’s eyes, like David his father. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_3">3&#160;</span>But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and even made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out from before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_4">4&#160;</span>He sacrificed and burned incense in the high places, on the hills, and under every green tree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K216_5">5&#160;</span>Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to wage war. They besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_6">6&#160;</span>At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drove the Jews from Elath; and the Syrians came to Elath, and lived there to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_7">7&#160;</span>So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria, saying, “I am your servant and your son. Come up and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria and out of the hand of the king of Israel, who rise up against me.” 
<span class="verse" id="K216_8">8&#160;</span>Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in Yahweh’s house, and in the treasures of the king’s house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_9">9&#160;</span>The king of Assyria listened to him; and the king of Assyria went up against Damascus and took it, and carried its people captive to Kir, and killed Rezin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K216_10">10&#160;</span>King Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath Pileser king of Assyria, and saw the altar that was at Damascus; and king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest a drawing of the altar and plans to build it. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_11">11&#160;</span>Urijah the priest built an altar. According to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus, so Urijah the priest made it for the coming of king Ahaz from Damascus. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_12">12&#160;</span>When the king had come from Damascus, the king saw the altar; and the king came near to the altar, and offered on it. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_13">13&#160;</span>He burned his burnt offering and his meal offering, poured his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_14">14&#160;</span>The bronze altar, which was before Yahweh, he brought from the front of the house, from between his altar and Yahweh’s house, and put it on the north side of his altar. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_15">15&#160;</span>King Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, “On the great altar burn the morning burnt offering, the evening meal offering, the king’s burnt offering and his meal offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land, their meal offering, and their drink offerings; and sprinkle on it all the blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice; but the bronze altar will be for me to inquire by.” 
<span class="verse" id="K216_16">16&#160;</span>Urijah the priest did so, according to all that king Ahaz commanded. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K216_17">17&#160;</span>King Ahaz cut off the panels of the bases, and removed the basin from off them, and took down the sea from off the bronze oxen that were under it, and put it on a pavement of stone. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_18">18&#160;</span>He removed the covered way for the Sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king’s outer entrance to Yahweh’s house, because of the king of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="K216_19">19&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K216_20">20&#160;</span>Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s city; and Hezekiah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K217_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_1">1&#160;</span>In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea the son of Elah began to reign in Samaria over Israel for nine years. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, yet not as the kings of Israel who were before him. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_3">3&#160;</span>Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against him; and Hoshea became his servant, and brought him tribute. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_4">4&#160;</span>The king of Assyria discovered a conspiracy in Hoshea; for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year. Therefore the king of Assyria seized him, and bound him in prison. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_5">5&#160;</span>Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_6">6&#160;</span>In the ninth year of Hoshea the king of Assyria took Samaria and carried Israel away to Assyria, and placed them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_7">7&#160;</span>It was so because the children of Israel had sinned against Yahweh their God, who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods, 
<span class="verse" id="K217_8">8&#160;</span>and walked in the statutes of the nations whom Yahweh cast out from before the children of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they made. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_9">9&#160;</span>The children of Israel secretly did things that were not right against Yahweh their God; and they built high places for themselves in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city; 
<span class="verse" id="K217_10">10&#160;</span>and they set up for themselves pillars and Asherah poles on every high hill and under every green tree; 
<span class="verse" id="K217_11">11&#160;</span>and there they burned incense in all the high places, as the nations whom Yahweh carried away before them did; and they did wicked things to provoke Yahweh to anger; 
<span class="verse" id="K217_12">12&#160;</span>and they served idols, of which Yahweh had said to them, “You shall not do this thing.” 
<span class="verse" id="K217_13">13&#160;</span>Yet Yahweh testified to Israel and to Judah, by every prophet and every seer, saying, “Turn from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.” 
<span class="verse" id="K217_14">14&#160;</span>Notwithstanding, they would not listen, but hardened their neck like the neck of their fathers who didn’t believe in Yahweh their God. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_15">15&#160;</span>They rejected his statutes and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified to them; and they followed vanity, and became vain, and followed the nations that were around them, concerning whom Yahweh had commanded them that they should not do like them. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_16">16&#160;</span>They abandoned all the commandments of Yahweh their God, and made molten images for themselves, even two calves, and made an Asherah, and worshiped all the army of the sky, and served Baal. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_17">17&#160;</span>They caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, to provoke him to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_18">18&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight. There was none left but the tribe of Judah only. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_19">19&#160;</span>Also Judah didn’t keep the commandments of Yahweh their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh rejected all the offspring of Israel, afflicted them, and delivered them into the hands of raiders, until he had cast them out of his sight. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_21">21&#160;</span>For he tore Israel from David’s house; and they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king; and Jeroboam drove Israel from following Yahweh, and made them sin a great sin. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_22">22&#160;</span>The children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did; they didn’t depart from them 
<span class="verse" id="K217_23">23&#160;</span>until Yahweh removed Israel out of his sight, as he said by all his servants the prophets. So Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assyria to this day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_24">24&#160;</span>The king of Assyria brought people from Babylon, from Cuthah, from Avva, and from Hamath and Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel; and they possessed Samaria and lived in its cities. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_25">25&#160;</span>So it was, at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they didn’t fear Yahweh. Therefore Yahweh sent lions among them, which killed some of them. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying, “The nations which you have carried away and placed in the cities of Samaria don’t know the law of the god of the land. Therefore he has sent lions among them; and behold, they kill them, because they don’t know the law of the god of the land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_27">27&#160;</span>Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, “Carry there one of the priests whom you brought from there; and let him<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> go and dwell there, and let him teach them the law of the god of the land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_28">28&#160;</span>So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and lived in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_29">29&#160;</span>However every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities in which they lived. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_30">30&#160;</span>The men of Babylon made Succoth Benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima, 
<span class="verse" id="K217_31">31&#160;</span>and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak; and the Sepharvites burned their children in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_32">32&#160;</span>So they feared Yahweh, and also made from among themselves priests of the high places for themselves, who sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_33">33&#160;</span>They feared Yahweh, and also served their own gods, after the ways of the nations from among whom they had been carried away. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_34">34&#160;</span>To this day they do what they did before. They don’t fear Yahweh, and they do not follow the statutes, or the ordinances, or the law, or the commandment which Yahweh commanded the children of Jacob, whom he named Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="K217_35">35&#160;</span>with whom Yahweh had made a covenant and commanded them, saying, “You shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them; 
<span class="verse" id="K217_36">36&#160;</span>but you shall fear Yahweh, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched arm, and you shall bow yourselves to him, and you shall sacrifice to him. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_37">37&#160;</span>The statutes and the ordinances, and the law and the commandment which he wrote for you, you shall observe to do forever more. You shall not fear other gods. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_38">38&#160;</span>You shall not forget the covenant that I have made with you. You shall not fear other gods. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_39">39&#160;</span>But you shall fear Yahweh your God, and he will deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K217_40">40&#160;</span>However they didn’t listen, but they did what they did before. 
<span class="verse" id="K217_41">41&#160;</span>So these nations feared Yahweh, and also served their engraved images. Their children did likewise, and so did their children’s children. They do as their fathers did to this day.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K218_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_1">1&#160;</span>Now in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_2">2&#160;</span>He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abi the daughter of Zechariah. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_3">3&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, according to all that David his father had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_4">4&#160;</span>He removed the high places, broke the pillars, and cut down the Asherah. He also broke in pieces the bronze serpent that Moses had made, because in those days the children of Israel burned incense to it; and he called it Nehushtan. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_5">5&#160;</span>He trusted in Yahweh, the God of Israel, so that after him was no one like him among all the kings of Judah, nor among them that were before him. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_6">6&#160;</span>For he joined with Yahweh. He didn’t depart from following him, but kept his commandments, which Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh was with him. Wherever he went, he prospered. He rebelled against the king of Assyria, and didn’t serve him. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_8">8&#160;</span>He struck the Philistines to Gaza and its borders, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_9">9&#160;</span>In the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria and besieged it. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_10">10&#160;</span>At the end of three years they took it. In the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel, Samaria was taken. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_11">11&#160;</span>The king of Assyria carried Israel away to Assyria, and put them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes, 
<span class="verse" id="K218_12">12&#160;</span>because they didn’t obey Yahweh their God’s voice, but transgressed his covenant, even all that Moses the servant of Yahweh commanded, and would not hear it or do it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_13">13&#160;</span>Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah and took them. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_14">14&#160;</span>Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria at Lachish, saying, “I have offended you. Withdraw from me. That which you put on me, I will bear.” The king of Assyria appointed to Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_15">15&#160;</span>Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in Yahweh’s house and in the treasures of the king’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_16">16&#160;</span>At that time, Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of Yahweh’s temple, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_17">17&#160;</span>The king of Assyria sent Tartan, Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great army to Jerusalem. They went up and came to Jerusalem. When they had come up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is in the highway of the fuller’s field. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_18">18&#160;</span>When they had called to the king, Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebnah the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder came out to them. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_19">19&#160;</span>Rabshakeh said to them, “Say now to Hezekiah, ‘The great king, the king of Assyria, says, “What confidence is this in which you trust? 
<span class="verse" id="K218_20">20&#160;</span>You say (but they are but vain words), ‘There is counsel and strength for war.’ Now on whom do you trust, that you have rebelled against me? 
<span class="verse" id="K218_21">21&#160;</span>Now, behold, you trust in the staff of this bruised reed, even in Egypt. If a man leans on it, it will go into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust on him. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_22">22&#160;</span>But if you tell me, ‘We trust in Yahweh our God,’ isn’t that he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, ‘You shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?’ 
<span class="verse" id="K218_23">23&#160;</span>Now therefore, please give pledges to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses if you are able on your part to set riders on them. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_24">24&#160;</span>How then can you turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put your trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 
<span class="verse" id="K218_25">25&#160;</span>Have I now come up without Yahweh against this place to destroy it? Yahweh said to me, ‘Go up against this land, and destroy it.’ ” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_26">26&#160;</span>Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, Shebnah, and Joah, said to Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it. Don’t speak with us in the Jews’ language, in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_27">27&#160;</span>But Rabshakeh said to them, “Has my master sent me to your master and to you, to speak these words? Hasn’t he sent me to the men who sit on the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own urine with you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_28">28&#160;</span>Then Rabshakeh stood and cried with a loud voice in the Jews’ language, and spoke, saying, “Hear the word of the great king, the king of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_29">29&#160;</span>The king says, ‘Don’t let Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you out of his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="K218_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t let Hezekiah make you trust in Yahweh, saying, “Yahweh will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 
<span class="verse" id="K218_31">31&#160;</span>Don’t listen to Hezekiah.’ For the king of Assyria says, ‘Make your peace with me, and come out to me; and everyone of you eat from his own vine, and everyone from his own fig tree, and everyone drink water from his own cistern; 
<span class="verse" id="K218_32">32&#160;</span>until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and of honey, that you may live and not die. Don’t listen to Hezekiah when he persuades you, saying, “Yahweh will deliver us.” 
<span class="verse" id="K218_33">33&#160;</span>Has any of the gods of the nations ever delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria? 
<span class="verse" id="K218_34">34&#160;</span>Where are the gods of Hamath and of Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? 
<span class="verse" id="K218_35">35&#160;</span>Who are they among all the gods of the countries, that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Yahweh should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K218_36">36&#160;</span>But the people stayed quiet, and answered him not a word; for the king’s commandment was, “Don’t answer him.” 
<span class="verse" id="K218_37">37&#160;</span>Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, came with Shebna the scribe and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him Rabshakeh’s words.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K219_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_1">1&#160;</span>When king Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes, covered himself with sackcloth, and went into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_2">2&#160;</span>He sent Eliakim, who was over the household, Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_3">3&#160;</span>They said to him, “Hezekiah says, ‘Today is a day of trouble, of rebuke, and of rejection; for the children have come to the point of birth, and there is no strength to deliver them. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_4">4&#160;</span>It may be Yahweh your God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which Yahweh your God has heard. Therefore lift up your prayer for the remnant that is left.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_5">5&#160;</span>So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_6">6&#160;</span>Isaiah said to them, “Tell your master this: ‘Yahweh says, “Don’t be afraid of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he will hear news, and will return to his own land. I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_8">8&#160;</span>So Rabshakeh returned and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah; for he had heard that he had departed from Lachish. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_9">9&#160;</span>When he heard it said of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, “Behold, he has come out to fight against you,” he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K219_10">10&#160;</span>“Tell Hezekiah king of Judah this: ‘Don’t let your God in whom you trust deceive you, saying, Jerusalem will not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. Will you be delivered? 
<span class="verse" id="K219_12">12&#160;</span>Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed—Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the children of Eden who were in Telassar? 
<span class="verse" id="K219_13">13&#160;</span>Where is the king of Hamath, the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_14">14&#160;</span>Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and read it. Then Hezekiah went up to Yahweh’s house, and spread it before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_15">15&#160;</span>Hezekiah prayed before Yahweh, and said, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, who are enthroned above the cherubim, you are the God, even you alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. You have made heaven and earth. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_16">16&#160;</span>Incline your ear, Yahweh, and hear. Open your eyes, Yahweh, and see. Hear the words of Sennacherib, which he has sent to defy the living God. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_17">17&#160;</span>Truly, Yahweh, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands, 
<span class="verse" id="K219_18">18&#160;</span>and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_19">19&#160;</span>Now therefore, Yahweh our God, save us, I beg you, out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you, Yahweh, are God alone.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_20">20&#160;</span>Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says ‘You have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, and I have heard you. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_21">21&#160;</span>This is the word that Yahweh has spoken concerning him: ‘The virgin daughter of Zion has despised you and ridiculed you. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at you. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_22">22&#160;</span>Whom have you defied and blasphemed? Against whom have you exalted your voice and lifted up your eyes on high? Against the Holy One of Israel! 
<span class="verse" id="K219_23">23&#160;</span>By your messengers, you have defied the Lord, and have said, “With the multitude of my chariots, I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon, and I will cut down its tall cedars and its choice cypress trees; and I will enter into his farthest lodging place, the forest of his fruitful field. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_24">24&#160;</span>I have dug and drunk strange waters, and I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt with the sole of my feet.” 
<span class="verse" id="K219_25">25&#160;</span>Haven’t you heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it of ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that it should be yours to lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore their inhabitants had little power. They were dismayed and confounded. They were like the grass of the field and like the green herb, like the grass on the housetops and like grain blasted before it has grown up. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_27">27&#160;</span>But I know your sitting down, your going out, your coming in, and your raging against me. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_28">28&#160;</span>Because of your raging against me, and because your arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in your nose, and my bridle in your lips, and I will turn you back by the way by which you came.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_29">29&#160;</span>“This will be the sign to you: This year, you will eat that which grows of itself, and in the second year that which springs from that; and in the third year sow and reap, and plant vineyards and eat their fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_30">30&#160;</span>The remnant that has escaped of the house of Judah will again take root downward, and bear fruit upward. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_31">31&#160;</span>For out of Jerusalem a remnant will go out, and out of Mount Zion those who shall escape. Yahweh’s zeal will perform this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_32">32&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh says concerning the king of Assyria, ‘He will not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there. He will not come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_33">33&#160;</span>He will return the same way that he came, and he will not come to this city,’ says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_34">34&#160;</span>‘For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake and for my servant David’s sake.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K219_35">35&#160;</span>That night, Yahweh’s angel went out and struck one hundred eighty-five thousand in the camp of the Assyrians. When men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_36">36&#160;</span>So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, went home, and lived at Nineveh. 
<span class="verse" id="K219_37">37&#160;</span>As he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, Adrammelech and Sharezer struck him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. Esar Haddon his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K220_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_1">1&#160;</span>In those days Hezekiah was sick and dying. Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said to him, “Yahweh says, ‘Set your house in order; for you will die, and not live.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_2">2&#160;</span>Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K220_3">3&#160;</span>“Remember now, Yahweh, I beg you, how I have walked before you in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in your sight.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_4">4&#160;</span>Before Isaiah had gone out into the middle part of the city, Yahweh’s word came to him, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K220_5">5&#160;</span>“Turn back, and tell Hezekiah the prince of my people, ‘Yahweh, the God of David your father, says, “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Behold, I will heal you. On the third day, you will go up to Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K220_6">6&#160;</span>I will add to your days fifteen years. I will deliver you and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria. I will defend this city for my own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_7">7&#160;</span>Isaiah said, “Take a cake of figs.” </div>
<div class='p'>They took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_8">8&#160;</span>Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “What will be the sign that Yahweh will heal me, and that I will go up to Yahweh’s house the third day?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_9">9&#160;</span>Isaiah said, “This will be the sign to you from Yahweh, that Yahweh will do the thing that he has spoken: should the shadow go forward ten steps, or go back ten steps?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_10">10&#160;</span>Hezekiah answered, “It is a light thing for the shadow to go forward ten steps. No, but let the shadow return backward ten steps.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_11">11&#160;</span>Isaiah the prophet cried to Yahweh; and he brought the shadow ten steps backward, by which it had gone down on the sundial of Ahaz. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_12">12&#160;</span>At that time Berodach Baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick. 
<span class="verse" id="K220_13">13&#160;</span>Hezekiah listened to them, and showed them all the storehouse of his precious things—the silver, the gold, the spices, and the precious oil, and the house of his armor, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, or in all his dominion, that Hezekiah didn’t show them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_14">14&#160;</span>Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah, and said to him, “What did these men say? From where did they come to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>Hezekiah said, “They have come from a far country, even from Babylon.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_15">15&#160;</span>He said, “What have they seen in your house?” </div>
<div class='p'>Hezekiah answered, “They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_16">16&#160;</span>Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear Yahweh’s word. 
<span class="verse" id="K220_17">17&#160;</span>‘Behold, the days come that all that is in your house, and that which your fathers have laid up in store to this day, will be carried to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K220_18">18&#160;</span>‘They will take away some of your sons who will issue from you, whom you will father; and they will be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_19">19&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “Yahweh’s word which you have spoken is good.” He said moreover, “Isn’t it so, if peace and truth will be in my days?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K220_20">20&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made the pool, and the conduit, and brought water into the city, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K220_21">21&#160;</span>Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and Manasseh his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K221_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K221_1">1&#160;</span>Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hephzibah. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, after the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_3">3&#160;</span>For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed; and he raised up altars for Baal, and made an Asherah, as Ahab king of Israel did, and worshiped all the army of the sky, and served them. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_4">4&#160;</span>He built altars in Yahweh’s house, of which Yahweh said, “I will put my name in Jerusalem.” 
<span class="verse" id="K221_5">5&#160;</span>He built altars for all the army of the sky in the two courts of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_6">6&#160;</span>He made his son to pass through the fire, practiced sorcery, used enchantments, and dealt with those who had familiar spirits and with wizards. He did much evil in Yahweh’s sight, to provoke him to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_7">7&#160;</span>He set the engraved image of Asherah that he had made in the house of which Yahweh said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever; 
<span class="verse" id="K221_8">8&#160;</span>I will not cause the feet of Israel to wander any more out of the land which I gave their fathers, if only they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.” 
<span class="verse" id="K221_9">9&#160;</span>But they didn’t listen, and Manasseh seduced them to do that which is evil more than the nations did whom Yahweh destroyed before the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K221_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke by his servants the prophets, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K221_11">11&#160;</span>“Because Manasseh king of Judah has done these abominations, and has done wickedly above all that the Amorites did, who were before him, and has also made Judah to sin with his idols; 
<span class="verse" id="K221_12">12&#160;</span>therefore Yahweh the God of Israel says, ‘Behold, I will bring such evil on Jerusalem and Judah that whoever hears of it, both his ears will tingle. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_13">13&#160;</span>I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plumb line of Ahab’s house; and I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_14">14&#160;</span>I will cast off the remnant of my inheritance and deliver them into the hands of their enemies. They will become a prey and a plunder to all their enemies, 
<span class="verse" id="K221_15">15&#160;</span>because they have done that which is evil in my sight, and have provoked me to anger since the day their fathers came out of Egypt, even to this day.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K221_16">16&#160;</span>Moreover Manasseh shed innocent blood very much, until he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another; in addition to his sin with which he made Judah to sin, in doing that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K221_17">17&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K221_18">18&#160;</span>Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza; and Amon his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K221_19">19&#160;</span>Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_20">20&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, as Manasseh his father did. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_21">21&#160;</span>He walked in all the ways that his father walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshiped them; 
<span class="verse" id="K221_22">22&#160;</span>and he abandoned Yahweh, the God of his fathers, and didn’t walk in the way of Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_23">23&#160;</span>The servants of Amon conspired against him, and put the king to death in his own house. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_24">24&#160;</span>But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="K221_25">25&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K221_26">26&#160;</span>He was buried in his tomb in the garden of Uzza, and Josiah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K222_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K222_1">1&#160;</span>Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, and walked in all the way of David his father, and didn’t turn away to the right hand or to the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K222_3">3&#160;</span>In the eighteenth year of king Josiah, the king sent Shaphan, the son of Azaliah the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to Yahweh’s house, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K222_4">4&#160;</span>“Go up to Hilkiah the high priest, that he may count the money which is brought into Yahweh’s house, which the keepers of the threshold have gathered of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_5">5&#160;</span>Let them deliver it into the hand of the workers who have the oversight of Yahweh’s house; and let them give it to the workers who are in Yahweh’s house, to repair the damage to the house, 
<span class="verse" id="K222_6">6&#160;</span>to the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons, and for buying timber and cut stone to repair the house. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_7">7&#160;</span>However, no accounting shall be asked of them for the money delivered into their hand, for they deal faithfully.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K222_8">8&#160;</span>Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the book of the law in Yahweh’s house.” Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan, and he read it. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_9">9&#160;</span>Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word again, and said, “Your servants have emptied out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hands of the workmen who have the oversight of Yahweh’s house.” 
<span class="verse" id="K222_10">10&#160;</span>Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, “Hilkiah the priest has delivered a book to me.” Then Shaphan read it before the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K222_11">11&#160;</span>When the king had heard the words of the book of the law, he tore his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_12">12&#160;</span>The king commanded Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam the son of Shaphan, Achbor the son of Micaiah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="K222_13">13&#160;</span>“Go inquire of Yahweh for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found; for great is Yahweh’s wrath that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not listened to the words of this book, to do according to all that which is written concerning us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K222_14">14&#160;</span>So Hilkiah the priest, Ahikam, Achbor, Shaphan, and Asaiah went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (now she lived in Jerusalem in the second quarter); and they talked with her. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_15">15&#160;</span>She said to them, “Yahweh the God of Israel says, ‘Tell the man who sent you to me, 
<span class="verse" id="K222_16">16&#160;</span>“Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will bring evil on this place and on its inhabitants, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah has read. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_17">17&#160;</span>Because they have forsaken me and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the work of their hands, therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and it will not be quenched.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="K222_18">18&#160;</span>But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of Yahweh, tell him, “Yahweh the God of Israel says, ‘Concerning the words which you have heard, 
<span class="verse" id="K222_19">19&#160;</span>because your heart was tender, and you humbled yourself before Yahweh when you heard what I spoke against this place and against its inhabitants, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have torn your clothes and wept before me, I also have heard you,’ says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="K222_20">20&#160;</span>‘Therefore behold, I will gather you to your fathers, and you will be gathered to your grave in peace. Your eyes will not see all the evil which I will bring on this place.’ ” ’ ” So they brought this message back to the king.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K223_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_1">1&#160;</span>The king sent, and they gathered to him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_2">2&#160;</span>The king went up to Yahweh’s house, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him—with the priests, the prophets, and all the people, both small and great; and he read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_3">3&#160;</span>The king stood by the pillar and made a covenant before Yahweh to walk after Yahweh and to keep his commandments, his testimonies, and his statutes with all his heart and all his soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were written in this book; and all the people agreed to the covenant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_4">4&#160;</span>The king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the threshold, to bring out of Yahweh’s temple all the vessels that were made for Baal, for the Asherah, and for all the army of the sky; and he burned them outside of Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron, and carried their ashes to Bethel. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_5">5&#160;</span>He got rid of the idolatrous priests whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah and in the places around Jerusalem; those also who burned incense to Baal, to the sun, to the moon, to the planets, and to all the army of the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_6">6&#160;</span>He brought out the Asherah from Yahweh’s house, outside of Jerusalem, to the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and beat it to dust, and cast its dust on the graves of the common people. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_7">7&#160;</span>He broke down the houses of the male shrine prostitutes that were in Yahweh’s house, where the women wove hangings for the Asherah. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_8">8&#160;</span>He brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beersheba; and he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man’s left hand at the gate of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_9">9&#160;</span>Nevertheless the priests of the high places didn’t come up to Yahweh’s altar in Jerusalem, but they ate unleavened bread among their brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_10">10&#160;</span>He defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_11">11&#160;</span>He took away the horses that the kings of Judah had dedicated to the sun, at the entrance of Yahweh’s house, by the room of Nathan Melech the officer who was in the court; and he burned the chariots of the sun with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_12">12&#160;</span>The king broke down the altars that were on the roof of the upper room of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of Yahweh’s house, and beat them down from there, and cast their dust into the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_13">13&#160;</span>The king defiled the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mountain of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for Milcom the abomination of the children of Ammon. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_14">14&#160;</span>He broke in pieces the pillars, cut down the Asherah poles, and filled their places with men’s bones. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_15">15&#160;</span>Moreover the altar that was at Bethel and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke down; and he burned the high place and beat it to dust, and burned the Asherah. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_16">16&#160;</span>As Josiah turned himself, he spied the tombs that were there in the mountain; and he sent, and took the bones out of the tombs, and burned them on the altar, and defiled it, according to Yahweh’s word which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_17">17&#160;</span>Then he said, “What monument is that which I see?” </div>
<div class='p'>The men of the city told him, “It is the tomb of the man of God who came from Judah and proclaimed these things that you have done against the altar of Bethel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_18">18&#160;</span>He said, “Let him be! Let no one move his bones.” So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet who came out of Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_19">19&#160;</span>All the houses also of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke Yahweh to anger, Josiah took away, and did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_20">20&#160;</span>He killed all the priests of the high places that were there, on the altars, and burned men’s bones on them; and he returned to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_21">21&#160;</span>The king commanded all the people, saying, “Keep the Passover to Yahweh your God, as it is written in this book of the covenant.” 
<span class="verse" id="K223_22">22&#160;</span>Surely there was not kept such a Passover from the days of the judges who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="K223_23">23&#160;</span>but in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, this Passover was kept to Yahweh in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_24">24&#160;</span>Moreover, Josiah removed those who had familiar spirits, the wizards, and the teraphim,<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and the idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might confirm the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_25">25&#160;</span>There was no king like him before him, who turned to Yahweh with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; and there was none like him who arose after him. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_26">26&#160;</span>Notwithstanding, Yahweh didn’t turn from the fierceness of his great wrath, with which his anger burned against Judah, because of all the provocation with which Manasseh had provoked him. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_27">27&#160;</span>Yahweh said, “I will also remove Judah out of my sight, as I have removed Israel; and I will cast off this city which I have chosen, even Jerusalem, and the house of which I said, ‘My name shall be there.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_28">28&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K223_29">29&#160;</span>In his days Pharaoh Necoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates; and king Josiah went against him, but Pharaoh Necoh killed him at Megiddo when he saw him. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_30">30&#160;</span>His servants carried him dead in a chariot from Megiddo, brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own tomb. The people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father’s place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K223_31">31&#160;</span>Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_32">32&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, according to all that his fathers had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_33">33&#160;</span>Pharaoh Necoh put him in bonds at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem; and put the land to a tribute of one hundred talents of silver and a talent<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_34">34&#160;</span>Pharaoh Necoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the place of Josiah his father, and changed his name to Jehoiakim; but he took Jehoahaz away, and he came to Egypt and died there. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_35">35&#160;</span>Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh; but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh. He exacted the silver and the gold of the people of the land, from everyone according to his assessment, to give it to Pharaoh Necoh. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_36">36&#160;</span>Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zebidah the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah. 
<span class="verse" id="K223_37">37&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, according to all that his fathers had done.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K224_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K224_1">1&#160;</span>In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years. Then he turned and rebelled against him. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh sent against him bands of the Chaldeans, bands of the Syrians, bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children of Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to Yahweh’s word which he spoke by his servants the prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_3">3&#160;</span>Surely at the commandment of Yahweh this came on Judah, to remove them out of his sight for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did, 
<span class="verse" id="K224_4">4&#160;</span>and also for the innocent blood that he shed; for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, and Yahweh would not pardon. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_5">5&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, aren’t they written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? 
<span class="verse" id="K224_6">6&#160;</span>So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K224_7">7&#160;</span>The king of Egypt didn’t come out of his land any more; for the king of Babylon had taken, from the brook of Egypt to the river Euphrates, all that belonged to the king of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K224_8">8&#160;</span>Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. His mother’s name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_9">9&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, according to all that his father had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_10">10&#160;</span>At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_11">11&#160;</span>Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it, 
<span class="verse" id="K224_12">12&#160;</span>and Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon—he, his mother, his servants, his princes, and his officers; and the king of Babylon captured him in the eighth year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_13">13&#160;</span>He carried out from there all the treasures of Yahweh’s house and the treasures of the king’s house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold which Solomon king of Israel had made in Yahweh’s temple, as Yahweh had said. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_14">14&#160;</span>He carried away all Jerusalem, and all the princes, and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the smiths. No one remained except the poorest people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_15">15&#160;</span>He carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon, with the king’s mother, the king’s wives, his officers, and the chief men of the land. He carried them into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_16">16&#160;</span>All the men of might, even seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the smiths one thousand, all of them strong and fit for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_17">17&#160;</span>The king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin’s father’s brother, king in his place, and changed his name to Zedekiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K224_18">18&#160;</span>Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_19">19&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, according to all that Jehoiakim had done. 
<span class="verse" id="K224_20">20&#160;</span>For through the anger of Yahweh, this happened in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence. </div>
<div class='p'>Then Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='K225_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_1">1&#160;</span>In the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it around it. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_2">2&#160;</span>So the city was besieged until the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_3">3&#160;</span>On the ninth day of the fourth month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_4">4&#160;</span>Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war fled by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king’s garden (now the Chaldeans were against the city around it); and the king went by the way of the Arabah. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_5">5&#160;</span>But the Chaldean army pursued the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_6">6&#160;</span>Then they captured the king and carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah; and they passed judgment on him. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_7">7&#160;</span>They killed Zedekiah’s sons before his eyes, then put out Zedekiah’s eyes, bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_8">8&#160;</span>Now in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_9">9&#160;</span>He burned Yahweh’s house, the king’s house, and all the houses of Jerusalem. He burned every great house with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_10">10&#160;</span>All the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls around Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_11">11&#160;</span>Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive the rest of the people who were left in the city and those who had deserted to the king of Babylon—all the rest of the multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_12">12&#160;</span>But the captain of the guard left some of the poorest of the land to work the vineyards and fields. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_13">13&#160;</span>The Chaldeans broke up the pillars of bronze that were in Yahweh’s house and the bases and the bronze sea that were in Yahweh’s house, and carried the bronze pieces to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_14">14&#160;</span>They took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the spoons, and all the vessels of bronze with which they ministered. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_15">15&#160;</span>The captain of the guard took away the fire pans, the basins, that which was of gold, for gold, and that which was of silver, for silver. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_16">16&#160;</span>The two pillars, the one sea, and the bases, which Solomon had made for Yahweh’s house, the bronze of all these vessels was not weighed. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_17">17&#160;</span>The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits,<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and a capital of bronze was on it. The height of the capital was three cubits, with network and pomegranates on the capital around it, all of bronze; and the second pillar with its network was like these. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_18">18&#160;</span>The captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold; 
<span class="verse" id="K225_19">19&#160;</span>and out of the city he took an officer who was set over the men of war; and five men of those who saw the king’s face, who were found in the city; and the scribe, the captain of the army, who mustered the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the city. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_20">20&#160;</span>Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_21">21&#160;</span>The king of Babylon attacked them and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_22">22&#160;</span>As for the people who were left in the land of Judah whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, even over them he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, governor. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_23">23&#160;</span>Now when all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, Johanan the son of Kareah, Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_24">24&#160;</span>Gedaliah swore to them and to their men, and said to them, “Don’t be afraid because of the servants of the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land and serve the king of Babylon, and it will be well with you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="K225_25">25&#160;</span>But in the seventh month, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal offspring came, and ten men with him, and struck Gedaliah so that he died, with the Jews and the Chaldeans that were with him at Mizpah. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_26">26&#160;</span>All the people, both small and great, and the captains of the forces arose and came to Egypt; for they were afraid of the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="K225_27">27&#160;</span>In the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, released Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison, 
<span class="verse" id="K225_28">28&#160;</span>and he spoke kindly to him and set his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon, 
<span class="verse" id="K225_29">29&#160;</span>and changed his prison garments. Jehoiachin ate bread before him continually all the days of his life; 
<span class="verse" id="K225_30">30&#160;</span>and for his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him from the king, every day a portion, all the days of his life. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K21_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:3</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K21_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:3</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K21_9"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:9</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K25_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:5</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K25_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:22</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K25_27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:27</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K26_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:25</a>
 <span class="ft">A kab was about 2 liters, so a fourth of a kab would be about 500 milliliters or about a pint</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:1</a>
 <span class="ft">1 seah is about 7 liters or 1.9 gallons or 0.8 pecks</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:1</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces. In this context, it was probably a silver coin weighing that much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “Lord” is “Adonai.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 7:16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 seah is about 7 liters or 1.9 gallons or 0.8 pecks</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:16</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces. In this context, it was probably a silver coin weighing that much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:18</a>
 <span class="ft">1 seah is about 7 liters or 1.9 gallons or 0.8 pecks</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K27_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7:18</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces. In this context, it was probably a silver coin weighing that much.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K29_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:8</a>
 <span class="ft">or, male</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#K212_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_12'>Exodus 30:12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K214_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:13</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K215_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:19</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds, so 1000 talents is about 30 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K215_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:20</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 50 shekels was about 0.5 kilograms or 1.1 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K217_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:27</a>
 <span class="ft">Hebrew: </span><span class="fq">them</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K218_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18:14</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K223_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:24</a>
 <span class="ft">teraphim were household idols.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K223_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:33</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#K225_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:17</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
