<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon 2 Timothy 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Timothy</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2TI.xhtml#T24_0'>4</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='T20_0'>

<div class='mt'>Paul’s Second Letter to Timothy  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='T21_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="T21_1">1&#160;</span>Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> through the will of God, according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus, 
<span class="verse" id="T21_2">2&#160;</span>to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T21_3">3&#160;</span>I thank God, whom I serve as my forefathers did, with a pure conscience. How unceasing is my memory of you in my petitions, night and day 
<span class="verse" id="T21_4">4&#160;</span>longing to see you, remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy; 
<span class="verse" id="T21_5">5&#160;</span>having been reminded of the sincere faith that is in you, which lived first in your grandmother Lois and your mother Eunice and, I am persuaded, in you also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T21_6">6&#160;</span>For this cause, I remind you that you should stir up the gift of God which is in you through the laying on of my hands. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_7">7&#160;</span>For God didn’t give us a spirit of fear, but of power, love, and self-control. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore don’t be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but endure hardship for the Good News according to the power of God, 
<span class="verse" id="T21_9">9&#160;</span>who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal, 
<span class="verse" id="T21_10">10&#160;</span>but has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Good News. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_11">11&#160;</span>For this I was appointed as a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_12">12&#160;</span>For this cause I also suffer these things. </div>
<div class='p'>Yet I am not ashamed, for I know him whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I have committed to him against that day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T21_13">13&#160;</span>Hold the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_14">14&#160;</span>That good thing which was committed to you, guard through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T21_15">15&#160;</span>This you know, that all who are in Asia turned away from me, of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes. 
<span class="verse" id="T21_16">16&#160;</span>May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, 
<span class="verse" id="T21_17">17&#160;</span>but when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently and found me 
<span class="verse" id="T21_18">18&#160;</span>(the Lord grant to him to find the Lord’s mercy in that day); and in how many things he served at Ephesus, you know very well.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='T22_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_1">1&#160;</span>You therefore, my child, be strengthened in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_2">2&#160;</span>The things which you have heard from me among many witnesses, commit the same things to faithful men who will be able to teach others also. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_3">3&#160;</span>You therefore must endure hardship as a good soldier of Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_4">4&#160;</span>No soldier on duty entangles himself in the affairs of life, that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_5">5&#160;</span>Also, if anyone competes in athletics, he isn’t crowned unless he has competed by the rules. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_6">6&#160;</span>The farmer who labors must be the first to get a share of the crops. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_7">7&#160;</span>Consider what I say, and may the Lord give you understanding in all things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_8">8&#160;</span>Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, of the offspring<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of David, according to my Good News, 
<span class="verse" id="T22_9">9&#160;</span>in which I suffer hardship to the point of chains as a criminal. But God’s word isn’t chained. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore I endure all things for the chosen ones’ sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_11">11&#160;</span>This saying is trustworthy: </div>
<div class='q'>“For if we died with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>we will also live with him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_12">12&#160;</span>If we endure, </div>
<div class='q2'>we will also reign with him. </div>
<div class='q'>If we deny him, </div>
<div class='q2'>he also will deny us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_13">13&#160;</span>If we are faithless, </div>
<div class='q2'>he remains faithful; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he can’t deny himself.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_14">14&#160;</span>Remind them of these things, charging them in the sight of the Lord that they don’t argue about words to no profit, to the subverting of those who hear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_15">15&#160;</span>Give diligence to present yourself approved by God, a workman who doesn’t need to be ashamed, properly handling the Word of Truth. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_16">16&#160;</span>But shun empty chatter, for it will go further in ungodliness, 
<span class="verse" id="T22_17">17&#160;</span>and those words will consume like gangrene, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus: 
<span class="verse" id="T22_18">18&#160;</span>men who have erred concerning the truth, saying that the resurrection is already past, and overthrowing the faith of some. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_19">19&#160;</span>However, God’s firm foundation stands, having this seal: “The Lord knows those who are his,”<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> and, “Let every one who names the name of the Lord<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> depart from unrighteousness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_20">20&#160;</span>Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of clay. Some are for honor and some for dishonor. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_21">21&#160;</span>If anyone therefore purges himself from these, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified, and suitable for the master’s use, prepared for every good work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T22_22">22&#160;</span>Flee from youthful lusts; but pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_23">23&#160;</span>But refuse foolish and ignorant questionings, knowing that they generate strife. 
<span class="verse" id="T22_24">24&#160;</span>The Lord’s servant must not quarrel, but be gentle toward all, able to teach, patient, 
<span class="verse" id="T22_25">25&#160;</span>in gentleness correcting those who oppose him. Perhaps God may give them repentance leading to a full knowledge of the truth, 
<span class="verse" id="T22_26">26&#160;</span>and they may recover themselves out of the devil’s snare, having been taken captive by him to do his will.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='T23_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T23_1">1&#160;</span>But know this: that in the last days, grievous times will come. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_2">2&#160;</span>For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_3">3&#160;</span>without natural affection, unforgiving, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, not lovers of good, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_4">4&#160;</span>traitors, headstrong, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_5">5&#160;</span>holding a form of godliness but having denied its power. Turn away from these, also. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_6">6&#160;</span>For some of these are people who creep into houses and take captive gullible women loaded down with sins, led away by various lusts, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_7">7&#160;</span>always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_8">8&#160;</span>Even as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so these also oppose the truth, men corrupted in mind, who concerning the faith are rejected. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_9">9&#160;</span>But they will proceed no further. For their folly will be evident to all men, as theirs also came to be. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T23_10">10&#160;</span>But you followed my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, steadfastness, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_11">11&#160;</span>persecutions, and sufferings—those things that happened to me at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. I endured those persecutions. The Lord delivered me out of them all. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_12">12&#160;</span>Yes, and all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_13">13&#160;</span>But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_14">14&#160;</span>But you remain in the things which you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from whom you have learned them. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_15">15&#160;</span>From infancy, you have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="T23_16">16&#160;</span>Every Scripture is God-breathed and<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness, 
<span class="verse" id="T23_17">17&#160;</span>that each person who belongs to God may be complete, thoroughly equipped for every good work.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='T24_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_1">1&#160;</span>I command you therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom: 
<span class="verse" id="T24_2">2&#160;</span>preach the word; be urgent in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all patience and teaching. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_3">3&#160;</span>For the time will come when they will not listen to the sound doctrine, but having itching ears, will heap up for themselves teachers after their own lusts, 
<span class="verse" id="T24_4">4&#160;</span>and will turn away their ears from the truth, and turn away to fables. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_5">5&#160;</span>But you be sober in all things, suffer hardship, do the work of an evangelist, and fulfill your ministry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_6">6&#160;</span>For I am already being offered, and the time of my departure has come. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_7">7&#160;</span>I have fought the good fight. I have finished the course. I have kept the faith. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_8">8&#160;</span>From now on, the crown of righteousness is stored up for me, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give to me on that day; and not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his appearing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_9">9&#160;</span>Be diligent to come to me soon, 
<span class="verse" id="T24_10">10&#160;</span>for Demas left me, having loved this present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia; and Titus to Dalmatia. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_11">11&#160;</span>Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for service. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_12">12&#160;</span>But I sent Tychicus to Ephesus. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_13">13&#160;</span>Bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus when you come—and the books, especially the parchments. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_14">14&#160;</span>Alexander the coppersmith did much evil to me. The Lord will repay him according to his deeds. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_15">15&#160;</span>Beware of him, for he greatly opposed our words. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_16">16&#160;</span>At my first defense, no one came to help me, but all left me. May it not be held against them. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_17">17&#160;</span>But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, that through me the message might be fully proclaimed, and that all the Gentiles might hear. So I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_18">18&#160;</span>And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work and will preserve me for his heavenly Kingdom. To him be the glory forever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_19">19&#160;</span>Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_20">20&#160;</span>Erastus remained at Corinth, but I left Trophimus at Miletus sick. 
<span class="verse" id="T24_21">21&#160;</span>Be diligent to come before winter. Eubulus salutes you, as do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="T24_22">22&#160;</span>The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Grace be with you. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Christ” means “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:8</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_19"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:19</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='NUM.xhtml#NU16_5'>Numbers 16:5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T22_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:19</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “Christ” instead of “the Lord”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#T23_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:16</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Every writing inspired by God is</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
