<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Acts 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Acts</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='ACT.xhtml#AC28_0'>28</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='AC0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Acts of the Apostles  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="AC1_1">1&#160;</span>The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach, 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_2">2&#160;</span>until the day in which he was received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_3">3&#160;</span>To these he also showed himself alive after he suffered, by many proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days and speaking about God’s Kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_4">4&#160;</span>Being assembled together with them, he commanded them, <span class='wj'>“Don’t depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which you heard from me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him, “Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_7">7&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“It isn’t for you to know times or seasons which the Father has set within his own authority. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you. You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_9">9&#160;</span>When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_10">10&#160;</span>While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went, behold,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> two men stood by them in white clothing, 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_11">11&#160;</span>who also said, “You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was received up from you into the sky, will come back in the same way as you saw him going into the sky.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_12">12&#160;</span>Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day’s journey away. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_13">13&#160;</span>When they had come in, they went up into the upper room where they were staying, that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_14">14&#160;</span>All these with one accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication, along with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_15">15&#160;</span>In these days, Peter stood up in the middle of the disciples (and the number of names was about one hundred twenty), and said, 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_16">16&#160;</span>“Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_17">17&#160;</span>For he was counted with us, and received his portion in this ministry. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_18">18&#160;</span>Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness; and falling headlong, his body burst open and all his intestines gushed out. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_19">19&#160;</span>It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called ‘Akeldama,’ that is, ‘The field of blood.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_20">20&#160;</span>For it is written in the book of Psalms, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Let his habitation be made desolate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let no one dwell in it;’<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>and, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Let another take his office.’<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_21">21&#160;</span>“Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_22">22&#160;</span>beginning from the baptism of John to the day that he was received up from us, of these one must become a witness with us of his resurrection.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC1_23">23&#160;</span>They put forward two: Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also called Justus, and Matthias. 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_24">24&#160;</span>They prayed and said, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you have chosen 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_25">25&#160;</span>to take part in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC1_26">26&#160;</span>They drew lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias; and he was counted with the eleven apostles.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_1">1&#160;</span>Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one accord in one place. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_2">2&#160;</span>Suddenly there came from the sky a sound like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_3">3&#160;</span>Tongues like fire appeared and were distributed to them, and one sat on each of them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_4">4&#160;</span>They were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak with other languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_5">5&#160;</span>Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation under the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_6">6&#160;</span>When this sound was heard, the multitude came together and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking in his own language. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_7">7&#160;</span>They were all amazed and marveled, saying to one another, “Behold, aren’t all these who speak Galileans? 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_8">8&#160;</span>How do we hear, everyone in our own native language? 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_9">9&#160;</span>Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_10">10&#160;</span>Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes, 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_11">11&#160;</span>Cretans and Arabians—we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_12">12&#160;</span>They were all amazed and were perplexed, saying to one another, “What does this mean?” 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_13">13&#160;</span>Others, mocking, said, “They are filled with new wine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_14">14&#160;</span>But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice and spoke out to them, “You men of Judea and all you who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_15">15&#160;</span>For these aren’t drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is only the third hour of the day.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_16">16&#160;</span>But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_17">17&#160;</span>‘It will be in the last days, says God, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. </div>
<div class='q'>Your sons and your daughters will prophesy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your young men will see visions. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your old men will dream dreams. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_18">18&#160;</span>Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_19">19&#160;</span>I will show wonders in the sky above, </div>
<div class='q2'>and signs on the earth beneath: </div>
<div class='q2'>blood, and fire, and billows of smoke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_20">20&#160;</span>The sun will be turned into darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the moon into blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_21">21&#160;</span>It will be that whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.’<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_22">22&#160;</span>“Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by him among you, even as you yourselves know, 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_23">23&#160;</span>him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed; 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_24">24&#160;</span>whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_25">25&#160;</span>For David says concerning him, </div>
<div class='q'>‘I saw the Lord always before my face, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced. </div>
<div class='q2'>Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_27">27&#160;</span>because you will not leave my soul in Hades,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_28">28&#160;</span>You made known to me the ways of life. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will make me full of gladness with your presence.’<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_29">29&#160;</span>“Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> to sit on his throne, 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_31">31&#160;</span>he foreseeing this, spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that his soul wasn’t left in Hades,<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> and his flesh didn’t see decay. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_32">32&#160;</span>This Jesus God raised up, to which we all are witnesses. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_33">33&#160;</span>Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which you now see and hear. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_34">34&#160;</span>For David didn’t ascend into the heavens, but he says himself, </div>
<div class='q'>‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit by my right hand </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_35">35&#160;</span>until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.” ’<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_36">36&#160;</span>“Let all the house of Israel therefore know certainly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_37">37&#160;</span>Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, “Brothers, what shall we do?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_38">38&#160;</span>Peter said to them, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_39">39&#160;</span>For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_40">40&#160;</span>With many other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, “Save yourselves from this crooked generation!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC2_41">41&#160;</span>Then those who gladly received his word were baptized. There were added that day about three thousand souls. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_42">42&#160;</span>They continued steadfastly in the apostles’ teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and prayer. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_43">43&#160;</span>Fear came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_44">44&#160;</span>All who believed were together, and had all things in common. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_45">45&#160;</span>They sold their possessions and goods, and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need. 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_46">46&#160;</span>Day by day, continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart, 
<span class="verse" id="AC2_47">47&#160;</span>praising God and having favor with all the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC3_1">1&#160;</span>Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_2">2&#160;</span>A certain man who was lame from his mother’s womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_3">3&#160;</span>Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_4">4&#160;</span>Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with John, said, “Look at us.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_5">5&#160;</span>He listened to them, expecting to receive something from them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_6">6&#160;</span>But Peter said, “I have no silver or gold, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_7">7&#160;</span>He took him by the right hand and raised him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_8">8&#160;</span>Leaping up, he stood and began to walk. He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_9">9&#160;</span>All the people saw him walking and praising God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_10">10&#160;</span>They recognized him, that it was he who used to sit begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_11">11&#160;</span>As the lame man who was healed held on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly wondering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC3_12">12&#160;</span>When Peter saw it, he responded to the people, “You men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk? 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_13">13&#160;</span>The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_14">14&#160;</span>But you denied the Holy and Righteous One and asked for a murderer to be granted to you, 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_15">15&#160;</span>and killed the Prince of life, whom God raised from the dead, to which we are witnesses. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_16">16&#160;</span>By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong, whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC3_17">17&#160;</span>“Now, brothers,<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> I know that you did this in ignorance, as did also your rulers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_18">18&#160;</span>But the things which God announced by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC3_19">19&#160;</span>“Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, so that there may come times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_20">20&#160;</span>and that he may send Christ Jesus, who was ordained for you before, 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_21">21&#160;</span>whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, which God spoke long ago by the mouth of his holy prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_22">22&#160;</span>For Moses indeed said to the fathers, ‘The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me. You shall listen to him in all things whatever he says to you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_23">23&#160;</span>It will be that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.’<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_24">24&#160;</span>Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after, as many as have spoken, also told of these days. 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_25">25&#160;</span>You are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, ‘All the families of the earth will be blessed through your offspring.’<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC3_26">26&#160;</span>God, having raised up his servant Jesus, sent him to you first to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your wickedness.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_1">1&#160;</span>As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_2">2&#160;</span>being upset because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_3">3&#160;</span>They laid hands on them, and put them in custody until the next day, for it was now evening. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_4">4&#160;</span>But many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men came to be about five thousand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_5">5&#160;</span>In the morning, their rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_6">6&#160;</span>Annas the high priest was there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of the high priest. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_7">7&#160;</span>When they had stood Peter and John in the middle of them, they inquired, “By what power, or in what name, have you done this?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_8">8&#160;</span>Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, “You rulers of the people and elders of Israel, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_9">9&#160;</span>if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_10">10&#160;</span>may it be known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, this man stands here before you whole in him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_11">11&#160;</span>He is ‘the stone which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which has become the head of the corner.’<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_12">12&#160;</span>There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven that is given among men, by which we must be saved!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_13">13&#160;</span>Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled. They recognized that they had been with Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_14">14&#160;</span>Seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_15">15&#160;</span>But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_16">16&#160;</span>saying, “What shall we do to these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them, as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can’t deny it. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_17">17&#160;</span>But so that this spreads no further among the people, let’s threaten them, that from now on they don’t speak to anyone in this name.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_18">18&#160;</span>They called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_19">19&#160;</span>But Peter and John answered them, “Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_20">20&#160;</span>for we can’t help telling the things which we saw and heard.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_21">21&#160;</span>When they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone glorified God for that which was done. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_22">22&#160;</span>For the man on whom this miracle of healing was performed was more than forty years old. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_23">23&#160;</span>Being let go, they came to their own company and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_24">24&#160;</span>When they heard it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord and said, “O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them; 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_25">25&#160;</span>who by the mouth of your servant David, said, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Why do the nations rage, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the peoples plot a vain thing? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_26">26&#160;</span>The kings of the earth take a stand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rulers take council together, </div>
<div class='q2'>against the Lord, and against his Christ.’<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_27">27&#160;</span>“For truly,<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_28">28&#160;</span>to do whatever your hand and your council foreordained to happen. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_29">29&#160;</span>Now, Lord, look at their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_30">30&#160;</span>while you stretch out your hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_31">31&#160;</span>When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_32">32&#160;</span>The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_33">33&#160;</span>With great power, the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them all. 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_34">34&#160;</span>For neither was there among them any who lacked, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the things that were sold, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_35">35&#160;</span>and laid them at the apostles’ feet; and distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC4_36">36&#160;</span>Joses, who by the apostles was also called Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of Encouragement), a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race, 
<span class="verse" id="AC4_37">37&#160;</span>having a field, sold it and brought the money and laid it at the apostles’ feet.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_1">1&#160;</span>But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold a possession, 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_2">2&#160;</span>and kept back part of the price, his wife also being aware of it, then brought a certain part and laid it at the apostles’ feet. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_3">3&#160;</span>But Peter said, “Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit and to keep back part of the price of the land? 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_4">4&#160;</span>While you kept it, didn’t it remain your own? After it was sold, wasn’t it in your power? How is it that you have conceived this thing in your heart? You haven’t lied to men, but to God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_5">5&#160;</span>Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great fear came on all who heard these things. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_6">6&#160;</span>The young men arose and wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_7">7&#160;</span>About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_8">8&#160;</span>Peter answered her, “Tell me whether you sold the land for so much.” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “Yes, for so much.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_9">9&#160;</span>But Peter asked her, “How is it that you have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_10">10&#160;</span>She fell down immediately at his feet and died. The young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_11">11&#160;</span>Great fear came on the whole assembly, and on all who heard these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_12">12&#160;</span>By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one accord in Solomon’s porch. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_13">13&#160;</span>None of the rest dared to join them; however, the people honored them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_14">14&#160;</span>More believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_15">15&#160;</span>They even carried out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mattresses, so that as Peter came by, at least his shadow might overshadow some of them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_16">16&#160;</span>The multitude also came together from the cities around Jerusalem, bringing sick people and those who were tormented by unclean spirits; and they were all healed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_17">17&#160;</span>But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_18">18&#160;</span>and laid hands on the apostles, then put them in public custody. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_19">19&#160;</span>But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and brought them out and said, 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_20">20&#160;</span>“Go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_21">21&#160;</span>When they heard this, they entered into the temple about daybreak and taught. But the high priest and those who were with him came and called the council together, with all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_22">22&#160;</span>But the officers who came didn’t find them in the prison. They returned and reported, 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_23">23&#160;</span>“We found the prison shut and locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_24">24&#160;</span>Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them and what might become of this. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_25">25&#160;</span>One came and told them, “Behold, the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_26">26&#160;</span>Then the captain went with the officers, and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people might stone them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_27">27&#160;</span>When they had brought them, they set them before the council. The high priest questioned them, 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_28">28&#160;</span>saying, “Didn’t we strictly command you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this man’s blood on us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_29">29&#160;</span>But Peter and the apostles answered, “We must obey God rather than men. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_30">30&#160;</span>The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, hanging him on a tree. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_31">31&#160;</span>God exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_32">32&#160;</span>We are his witnesses of these things; and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_33">33&#160;</span>But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and were determined to kill them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_34">34&#160;</span>But one stood up in the council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the people, and commanded to put the apostles out for a little while. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_35">35&#160;</span>He said to them, “You men of Israel, be careful concerning these men, what you are about to do. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_36">36&#160;</span>For before these days Theudas rose up, making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves. He was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed and came to nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_37">37&#160;</span>After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some people after him. He also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_38">38&#160;</span>Now I tell you, withdraw from these men and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it will be overthrown. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_39">39&#160;</span>But if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_40">40&#160;</span>They agreed with him. Summoning the apostles, they beat them and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. 
<span class="verse" id="AC5_41">41&#160;</span>They therefore departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus’ name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC5_42">42&#160;</span>Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC6_1">1&#160;</span>Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenists<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily service. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_2">2&#160;</span>The twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, “It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore, select from among you, brothers, seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_4">4&#160;</span>But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the word.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC6_5">5&#160;</span>These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch, 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_6">6&#160;</span>whom they set before the apostles. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC6_7">7&#160;</span>The word of God increased and the number of the disciples greatly multiplied in Jerusalem. A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC6_8">8&#160;</span>Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_9">9&#160;</span>But some of those who were of the synagogue called “The Libertines”, and of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with Stephen. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_10">10&#160;</span>They weren’t able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_11">11&#160;</span>Then they secretly induced men to say, “We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_12">12&#160;</span>They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and came against him and seized him, then brought him in to the council, 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_13">13&#160;</span>and set up false witnesses who said, “This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law. 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_14">14&#160;</span>For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC6_15">15&#160;</span>All who sat in the council, fastening their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_1">1&#160;</span>The high priest said, “Are these things so?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_2">2&#160;</span>He said, “Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_3">3&#160;</span>and said to him, ‘Get out of your land and away from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.’<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_4">4&#160;</span>Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans and lived in Haran. From there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land where you are now living. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_5">5&#160;</span>He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his offspring after him, when he still had no child. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_6">6&#160;</span>God spoke in this way: that his offspring would live as aliens in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_7">7&#160;</span>‘I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage,’ said God, ‘and after that they will come out and serve me in this place.’<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_8">8&#160;</span>He gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_9">9&#160;</span>“The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. God was with him 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_10">10&#160;</span>and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_11">11&#160;</span>Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction. Our fathers found no food. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_12">12&#160;</span>But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the first time. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_13">13&#160;</span>On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and Joseph’s family was revealed to Pharaoh. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_14">14&#160;</span>Joseph sent and summoned Jacob his father and all his relatives, seventy-five souls. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_15">15&#160;</span>Jacob went down into Egypt and he died, himself and our fathers; 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_16">16&#160;</span>and they were brought back to Shechem and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_17">17&#160;</span>“But as the time of the promise came close which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_18">18&#160;</span>until there arose a different king who didn’t know Joseph. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_19">19&#160;</span>The same took advantage of our race and mistreated our fathers, and forced them to abandon their babies, so that they wouldn’t stay alive. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_20">20&#160;</span>At that time Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome to God. He was nourished three months in his father’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_21">21&#160;</span>When he was abandoned, Pharaoh’s daughter took him up and reared him as her own son. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_22">22&#160;</span>Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_23">23&#160;</span>But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers,<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_24">24&#160;</span>Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him and avenged him who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_25">25&#160;</span>He supposed that his brothers understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they didn’t understand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_26">26&#160;</span>“The day following, he appeared to them as they fought, and urged them to be at peace again, saying, ‘Sirs, you are brothers. Why do you wrong one another?’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_27">27&#160;</span>But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed him away, saying, ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge over us? 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_28">28&#160;</span>Do you want to kill me as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?’<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_29">29&#160;</span>Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_30">30&#160;</span>“When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_31">31&#160;</span>When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he came close to see, the voice of the Lord came to him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_32">32&#160;</span>‘I am the God of your fathers: the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.’<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> Moses trembled and dared not look. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_33">33&#160;</span>The Lord said to him, ‘Take off your sandals, for the place where you stand is holy ground. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_34">34&#160;</span>I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their groaning. I have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.’<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_35">35&#160;</span>“This Moses whom they refused, saying, ‘Who made you a ruler and a judge?’—God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_36">36&#160;</span>This man led them out, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_37">37&#160;</span>This is that Moses who said to the children of Israel, ‘The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me.’<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_38">38&#160;</span>This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, who received living revelations to give to us, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_39">39&#160;</span>to whom our fathers wouldn’t be obedient, but rejected him and turned back in their hearts to Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_40">40&#160;</span>saying to Aaron, ‘Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses who led us out of the land of Egypt, we don’t know what has become of him.’<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_41">41&#160;</span>They made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_42">42&#160;</span>But God turned away and gave them up to serve the army of the sky,<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> as it is written in the book of the prophets, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices </div>
<div class='q2'>forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_43">43&#160;</span>You took up the tabernacle of Moloch, </div>
<div class='q2'>the star of your god Rephan, </div>
<div class='q'>the figures which you made to worship, </div>
<div class='q2'>so I will carry you away<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> beyond Babylon.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_44">44&#160;</span>“Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him to make it according to the pattern that he had seen; 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_45">45&#160;</span>which also our fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations whom God drove out before the face of our fathers to the days of David, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_46">46&#160;</span>who found favor in the sight of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_47">47&#160;</span>But Solomon built him a house. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_48">48&#160;</span>However, the Most High doesn’t dwell in temples made with hands, as the prophet says, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_49">49&#160;</span>‘heaven is my throne, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the earth a footstool for my feet. </div>
<div class='q'>What kind of house will you build me?’ says the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Or what is the place of my rest? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_50">50&#160;</span>Didn’t my hand make all these things?’<a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_51">51&#160;</span>“You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_52">52&#160;</span>Which of the prophets didn’t your fathers persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_53">53&#160;</span>You received the law as it was ordained by angels, and didn’t keep it!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_54">54&#160;</span>Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_55">55&#160;</span>But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_56">56&#160;</span>and said, “Behold, I see the heavens opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC7_57">57&#160;</span>But they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears, then rushed at him with one accord. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_58">58&#160;</span>They threw him out of the city and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_59">59&#160;</span>They stoned Stephen as he called out, saying, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC7_60">60&#160;</span>He kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, “Lord, don’t hold this sin against them!” When he had said this, he fell asleep.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_1">1&#160;</span>Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for the apostles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_2">2&#160;</span>Devout men buried Stephen and lamented greatly over him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_3">3&#160;</span>But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into every house and dragged both men and women off to prison. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_4">4&#160;</span>Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_5">5&#160;</span>Philip went down to the city of Samaria and proclaimed to them the Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_6">6&#160;</span>The multitudes listened with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip when they heard and saw the signs which he did. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_7">7&#160;</span>For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_8">8&#160;</span>There was great joy in that city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_9">9&#160;</span>But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who used to practice sorcery in the city and amazed the people of Samaria, making himself out to be some great one, 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_10">10&#160;</span>to whom they all listened, from the least to the greatest, saying, “This man is that great power of God.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_11">11&#160;</span>They listened to him because for a long time he had amazed them with his sorceries. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_12">12&#160;</span>But when they believed Philip preaching good news concerning God’s Kingdom and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_13">13&#160;</span>Simon himself also believed. Being baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles occurring, he was amazed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_14">14&#160;</span>Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them, 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_15">15&#160;</span>who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit; 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_16">16&#160;</span>for as yet he had fallen on none of them. They had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_17">17&#160;</span>Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_18">18&#160;</span>Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles’ hands, he offered them money, 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_19">19&#160;</span>saying, “Give me also this power, that whomever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_20">20&#160;</span>But Peter said to him, “May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money! 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_21">21&#160;</span>You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart isn’t right before God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_22">22&#160;</span>Repent therefore of this, your wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_23">23&#160;</span>For I see that you are in the poison of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_24">24&#160;</span>Simon answered, “Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the things which you have spoken happen to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_25">25&#160;</span>They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the Good News to many villages of the Samaritans. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_26">26&#160;</span>Then an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, “Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_27">27&#160;</span>He arose and went; and behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_28">28&#160;</span>He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_29">29&#160;</span>The Spirit said to Philip, “Go near, and join yourself to this chariot.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_30">30&#160;</span>Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, “Do you understand what you are reading?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_31">31&#160;</span>He said, “How can I, unless someone explains it to me?” He begged Philip to come up and sit with him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_32">32&#160;</span>Now the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this, </div>
<div class='q'>“He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. </div>
<div class='q2'>As a lamb before his shearer is silent, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he doesn’t open his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_33">33&#160;</span>In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will declare His generation? </div>
<div class='q2'>For his life is taken from the earth.”<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_34">34&#160;</span>The eunuch answered Philip, “Who is the prophet talking about? About himself, or about someone else?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_35">35&#160;</span>Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached to him about Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_36">36&#160;</span>As they went on the way, they came to some water; and the eunuch said, “Behold, here is water. What is keeping me from being baptized?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_37">37&#160;</span> <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_38">38&#160;</span>He commanded the chariot to stand still, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC8_39">39&#160;</span>When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn’t see him any more, for he went on his way rejoicing. 
<span class="verse" id="AC8_40">40&#160;</span>But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing through, he preached the Good News to all the cities until he came to Caesarea.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_1">1&#160;</span>But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_2">2&#160;</span>and asked for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_3">3&#160;</span>As he traveled, he got close to Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_4">4&#160;</span>He fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, <span class='wj'>“Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_5">5&#160;</span>He said, “Who are you, Lord?” </div>
<div class='p'>The Lord said, <span class='wj'>“I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.</span><a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>rise up and enter into the city, then you will be told what you must do.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_7">7&#160;</span>The men who traveled with him stood speechless, hearing the sound, but seeing no one. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_8">8&#160;</span>Saul arose from the ground, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_9">9&#160;</span>He was without sight for three days, and neither ate nor drank. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_10">10&#160;</span>Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, <span class='wj'>“Ananias!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Behold, it’s me, Lord.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_11">11&#160;</span>The Lord said to him, <span class='wj'>“Arise and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judah</span><a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_13">13&#160;</span>But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_14">14&#160;</span>Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_15">15&#160;</span>But the Lord said to him, <span class='wj'>“Go your way, for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the children of Israel. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name’s sake.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_17">17&#160;</span>Ananias departed and entered into the house. Laying his hands on him, he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you on the road by which you came, has sent me that you may receive your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_18">18&#160;</span>Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he received his sight. He arose and was baptized. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_19">19&#160;</span>He took food and was strengthened. </div>
<div class='p'>Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_20">20&#160;</span>Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_21">21&#160;</span>All who heard him were amazed, and said, “Isn’t this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_22">22&#160;</span>But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_23">23&#160;</span>When many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together to kill him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_24">24&#160;</span>but their plot became known to Saul. They watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_25">25&#160;</span>but his disciples took him by night and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_26">26&#160;</span>When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join himself to the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_27">27&#160;</span>But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord on the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_28">28&#160;</span>He was with them entering into<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_29">29&#160;</span>preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He spoke and disputed against the Hellenists,<a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> but they were seeking to kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_30">30&#160;</span>When the brothers<a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_31">31&#160;</span>So the assemblies throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria had peace and were built up. They were multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_32">32&#160;</span>As Peter went throughout all those parts, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_33">33&#160;</span>There he found a certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years because he was paralyzed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_34">34&#160;</span>Peter said to him, “Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!” Immediately he arose. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_35">35&#160;</span>All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC9_36">36&#160;</span>Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which when translated means Dorcas.<a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy which she did. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_37">37&#160;</span>In those days, she became sick and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper room. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_38">38&#160;</span>As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men<a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> to him, imploring him not to delay in coming to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_39">39&#160;</span>Peter got up and went with them. When he had come, they brought him into the upper room. All the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the tunics and other garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_40">40&#160;</span>Peter sent them all out, and knelt down and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, “Tabitha, get up!” She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_41">41&#160;</span>He gave her his hand and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_42">42&#160;</span>This became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="AC9_43">43&#160;</span>He stayed many days in Joppa with a tanner named Simon.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_1">1&#160;</span>Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment, 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_2">2&#160;</span>a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people, and always prayed to God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_3">3&#160;</span>At about the ninth hour of the day,<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him and saying to him, “Cornelius!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_4">4&#160;</span>He, fastening his eyes on him and being frightened, said, “What is it, Lord?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, “Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_5">5&#160;</span>Now send men to Joppa, and get Simon, who is also called Peter. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_6">6&#160;</span>He is staying with a tanner named Simon, whose house is by the seaside.<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_7">7&#160;</span>When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who waited on him continually. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_8">8&#160;</span>Having explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_9">9&#160;</span>Now on the next day as they were on their journey and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_10">10&#160;</span>He became hungry and desired to eat, but while they were preparing, he fell into a trance. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_11">11&#160;</span>He saw heaven opened and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by four corners on the earth, 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_12">12&#160;</span>in which were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_13">13&#160;</span>A voice came to him, <span class='wj'>“Rise, Peter, kill and eat!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_14">14&#160;</span>But Peter said, “Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_15">15&#160;</span>A voice came to him again the second time, <span class='wj'>“What God has cleansed, you must not call unclean.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_16">16&#160;</span>This was done three times, and immediately the thing was received up into heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_17">17&#160;</span>Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon’s house, stood before the gate, 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_18">18&#160;</span>and called and asked whether Simon, who was also called Peter, was lodging there. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_19">19&#160;</span>While Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, “Behold, three<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> men seek you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_20">20&#160;</span>But arise, get down, and go with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_21">21&#160;</span>Peter went down to the men, and said, “Behold, I am he whom you seek. Why have you come?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_22">22&#160;</span>They said, “Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to what you say.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_23">23&#160;</span>So he called them in and provided a place to stay. </div>
<div class='p'>On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_24">24&#160;</span>On the next day they entered into Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his relatives and his near friends. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_25">25&#160;</span>When Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_26">26&#160;</span>But Peter raised him up, saying, “Stand up! I myself am also a man.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_27">27&#160;</span>As he talked with him, he went in and found many gathered together. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_28">28&#160;</span>He said to them, “You yourselves know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn’t call any man unholy or unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_29">29&#160;</span>Therefore I also came without complaint when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_30">30&#160;</span>Cornelius said, “Four days ago, I was fasting until this hour; and at the ninth hour,<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_31">31&#160;</span>and said, ‘Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_32">32&#160;</span>Send therefore to Joppa and summon Simon, who is also called Peter. He is staying in the house of a tanner named Simon, by the seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_33">33&#160;</span>Therefore I sent to you at once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_34">34&#160;</span>Peter opened his mouth and said, “Truly I perceive that God doesn’t show favoritism; 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_35">35&#160;</span>but in every nation he who fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_36">36&#160;</span>The word which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ—he is Lord of all— 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_37">37&#160;</span>you yourselves know what happened, which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached; 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_38">38&#160;</span>how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_39">39&#160;</span>We are witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem; whom they also<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> killed, hanging him on a tree. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_40">40&#160;</span>God raised him up the third day and gave him to be revealed, 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_41">41&#160;</span>not to all the people, but to witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_42">42&#160;</span>He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_43">43&#160;</span>All the prophets testify about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC10_44">44&#160;</span>While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_45">45&#160;</span>They of the circumcision who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_46">46&#160;</span>For they heard them speaking in other languages and magnifying God. </div>
<div class='p'>Then Peter answered, 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_47">47&#160;</span>“Can anyone forbid these people from being baptized with water? They have received the Holy Spirit just like us.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC10_48">48&#160;</span>He commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_1">1&#160;</span>Now the apostles and the brothers<a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_2">2&#160;</span>When Peter had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision contended with him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_3">3&#160;</span>saying, “You went in to uncircumcised men and ate with them!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_4">4&#160;</span>But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_5">5&#160;</span>“I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_6">6&#160;</span>When I had looked intently at it, I considered, and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_7">7&#160;</span>I also heard a voice saying to me, <span class='wj'>‘Rise, Peter, kill and eat!’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_8">8&#160;</span>But I said, ‘Not so, Lord, for nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_9">9&#160;</span>But a voice answered me the second time out of heaven, <span class='wj'>‘What God has cleansed, don’t you call unclean.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_10">10&#160;</span>This was done three times, and all were drawn up again into heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, immediately three men stood before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_12">12&#160;</span>The Spirit told me to go with them without discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered into the man’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_13">13&#160;</span>He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house and saying to him, ‘Send to Joppa and get Simon, who is called Peter, 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_14">14&#160;</span>who will speak to you words by which you will be saved, you and all your house.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_15">15&#160;</span>As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_16">16&#160;</span>I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, <span class='wj'>‘John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_17">17&#160;</span>If then God gave to them the same gift as us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_18">18&#160;</span>When they heard these things, they held their peace and glorified God, saying, “Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_19">19&#160;</span>They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to Jews only. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_20">20&#160;</span>But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists,<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> preaching the Lord Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_21">21&#160;</span>The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_22">22&#160;</span>The report concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch, 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_23">23&#160;</span>who, when he had come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they should remain near to the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_24">24&#160;</span>For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_25">25&#160;</span>Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_26">26&#160;</span>When he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. For a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC11_27">27&#160;</span>Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_28">28&#160;</span>One of them named Agabus stood up and indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the world, which also happened in the days of Claudius. 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_29">29&#160;</span>As any of the disciples had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea; 
<span class="verse" id="AC11_30">30&#160;</span>which they also did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_1">1&#160;</span>Now about that time, King Herod stretched out his hands to oppress some of the assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_2">2&#160;</span>He killed James, the brother of John, with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_3">3&#160;</span>When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened bread. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_4">4&#160;</span>When he had arrested him, he put him in prison and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_5">5&#160;</span>Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_6">6&#160;</span>The same night when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_7">7&#160;</span>And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side and woke him up, saying, “Stand up quickly!” His chains fell off his hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_8">8&#160;</span>The angel said to him, “Get dressed and put on your sandals.” He did so. He said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_9">9&#160;</span>And he went out and followed him. He didn’t know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_10">10&#160;</span>When they were past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out and went down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_11">11&#160;</span>When Peter had come to himself, he said, “Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_12">12&#160;</span>Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John who was called Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_13">13&#160;</span>When Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to answer. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_14">14&#160;</span>When she recognized Peter’s voice, she didn’t open the gate for joy, but ran in and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_15">15&#160;</span>They said to her, “You are crazy!” But she insisted that it was so. They said, “It is his angel.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_16">16&#160;</span>But Peter continued knocking. When they had opened, they saw him and were amazed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_17">17&#160;</span>But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, “Tell these things to James and to the brothers.” Then he departed and went to another place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_18">18&#160;</span>Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_19">19&#160;</span>When Herod had sought for him and didn’t find him, he examined the guards, then commanded that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea, and stayed there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_20">20&#160;</span>Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him and, having made Blastus, the king’s personal aide, their friend, they asked for peace, because their country depended on the king’s country for food. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_21">21&#160;</span>On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_22">22&#160;</span>The people shouted, “The voice of a god, and not of a man!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_23">23&#160;</span>Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him, because he didn’t give God the glory. Then he was eaten by worms and died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC12_24">24&#160;</span>But the word of God grew and multiplied. 
<span class="verse" id="AC12_25">25&#160;</span>Barnabas and Saul returned to<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Jerusalem when they had fulfilled their service, also taking with them John who was called Mark.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_1">1&#160;</span>Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_2">2&#160;</span>As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, “Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_3">3&#160;</span>Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_4">4&#160;</span>So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_5">5&#160;</span>When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed God’s word in the Jewish synagogues. They also had John as their attendant. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_6">6&#160;</span>When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew whose name was Bar Jesus, 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_7">7&#160;</span>who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of understanding. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear the word of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_8">8&#160;</span>But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn the proconsul away from the faith. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_9">9&#160;</span>But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_10">10&#160;</span>and said, “You son of the devil, full of all deceit and all cunning, you enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_11">11&#160;</span>Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!” </div>
<div class='p'>Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him. He went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_12">12&#160;</span>Then the proconsul, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_13">13&#160;</span>Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos and came to Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_14">14&#160;</span>But they, passing on from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_15">15&#160;</span>After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_16">16&#160;</span>Paul stood up, and gesturing with his hand said, “Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_17">17&#160;</span>The God of this people<a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_18">18&#160;</span>For a period of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_19">19&#160;</span>When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance for about four hundred fifty years. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_20">20&#160;</span>After these things, he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_21">21&#160;</span>Afterward they asked for a king, and God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_22">22&#160;</span>When he had removed him, he raised up David to be their king, to whom he also testified, ‘I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_23">23&#160;</span>From this man’s offspring, God has brought salvation<a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to Israel according to his promise, 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_24">24&#160;</span>before his coming, when John had first preached the baptism of repentance to Israel.<a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_25">25&#160;</span>As John was fulfilling his course, he said, ‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one comes after me, the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_26">26&#160;</span>“Brothers, children of the stock of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation is sent out to you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_27">27&#160;</span>For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they didn’t know him, nor the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_28">28&#160;</span>Though they found no cause for death, they still asked Pilate to have him killed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_29">29&#160;</span>When they had fulfilled all things that were written about him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_30">30&#160;</span>But God raised him from the dead, 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_31">31&#160;</span>and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_32">32&#160;</span>We bring you good news of the promise made to the fathers, 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_33">33&#160;</span>that God has fulfilled this to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the second psalm, </div>
<div class='q'>‘You are my Son. </div>
<div class='q2'>Today I have become your father.’<a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_34">34&#160;</span>“Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: ‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.’<a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_35">35&#160;</span>Therefore he says also in another psalm, ‘You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.’<a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_36">36&#160;</span>For David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, was laid with his fathers, and saw decay. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_37">37&#160;</span>But he whom God raised up saw no decay. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_38">38&#160;</span>Be it known to you therefore, brothers,<a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins; 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_39">39&#160;</span>and by him everyone who believes is justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_40">40&#160;</span>Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is spoken in the prophets: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_41">41&#160;</span>‘Behold, you scoffers! </div>
<div class='q2'>Wonder and perish, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I work a work in your days, </div>
<div class='q2'>a work which you will in no way believe, if one declares it to you.’ ” <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_42">42&#160;</span>So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_43">43&#160;</span>Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_44">44&#160;</span>The next Sabbath, almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_45">45&#160;</span>But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul, and blasphemed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_46">46&#160;</span>Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, “It was necessary that God’s word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed you thrust it from yourselves, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_47">47&#160;</span>For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>‘I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.’ ” <a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC13_48">48&#160;</span>As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and glorified the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_49">49&#160;</span>The Lord’s word was spread abroad throughout all the region. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_50">50&#160;</span>But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent women and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_51">51&#160;</span>But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium. 
<span class="verse" id="AC13_52">52&#160;</span>The disciples were filled with joy and with the Holy Spirit.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_1">1&#160;</span>In Iconium, they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_2">2&#160;</span>But the disbelieving<a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_4">4&#160;</span>But the multitude of the city was divided. Part sided with the Jews and part with the apostles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_5">5&#160;</span>When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to mistreat and stone them, 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_6">6&#160;</span>they became aware of it and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_7">7&#160;</span>There they preached the Good News. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_8">8&#160;</span>At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother’s womb, who never had walked. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_9">9&#160;</span>He was listening to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him and seeing that he had faith to be made whole, 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_10">10&#160;</span>said with a loud voice, “Stand upright on your feet!” He leaped up and walked. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_11">11&#160;</span>When the multitude saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia, “The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_12">12&#160;</span>They called Barnabas “Jupiter”, and Paul “Mercury”, because he was the chief speaker. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_13">13&#160;</span>The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have made a sacrifice along with the multitudes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_14">14&#160;</span>But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes and sprang into the multitude, crying out, 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_15">15&#160;</span>“Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men of the same nature as you, and bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the sky, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them; 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_16">16&#160;</span>who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_17">17&#160;</span>Yet he didn’t leave himself without witness, in that he did good and gave you<a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> rains from the sky and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_18">18&#160;</span>Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_19">19&#160;</span>But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paul and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_20">20&#160;</span>But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to Derbe. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_21">21&#160;</span>When they had preached the Good News to that city and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_22">22&#160;</span>strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter into God’s Kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_23">23&#160;</span>When they had appointed elders for them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord on whom they had believed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC14_24">24&#160;</span>They passed through Pisidia and came to Pamphylia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_25">25&#160;</span>When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_26">26&#160;</span>From there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_27">27&#160;</span>When they had arrived and had gathered the assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="AC14_28">28&#160;</span>They stayed there with the disciples for a long time.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_1">1&#160;</span>Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers,<a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> “Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you can’t be saved.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them, they appointed Paul, Barnabas, and some others of them to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_3">3&#160;</span>They, being sent on their way by the assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_4">4&#160;</span>When they had come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they reported everything that God had done with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_5">5&#160;</span>But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up, saying, “It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_6">6&#160;</span>The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_7">7&#160;</span>When there had been much discussion, Peter rose up and said to them, “Brothers, you know that a good while ago God made a choice among you that by my mouth the nations should hear the word of the Good News and believe. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_8">8&#160;</span>God, who knows the heart, testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to us. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_9">9&#160;</span>He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_10">10&#160;</span>Now therefore why do you tempt God, that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_11">11&#160;</span>But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus,<a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> just as they are.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_12">12&#160;</span>All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among the nations through them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_13">13&#160;</span>After they were silent, James answered, “Brothers, listen to me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_14">14&#160;</span>Simeon has reported how God first visited the nations to take out of them a people for his name. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_15">15&#160;</span>This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is written, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_16">16&#160;</span>‘After these things I will return. </div>
<div class='q'>I will again build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen. </div>
<div class='q'>I will again build its ruins. </div>
<div class='q'>I will set it up 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_17">17&#160;</span>that the rest of men may seek after the Lord; </div>
<div class='q'>all the Gentiles who are called by my name, </div>
<div class='q'>says the Lord, who does all these things.’<a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_18">18&#160;</span>“All of God’s works are known to him from eternity. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore my judgment is that we don’t trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God, 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_20">20&#160;</span>but that we write to them that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_21">21&#160;</span>For Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every Sabbath.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_22">22&#160;</span>Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers.<a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_23">23&#160;</span>They wrote these things by their hand: </div>
<div class='p'>“The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_24">24&#160;</span>Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words, unsettling your souls, saying, ‘You must be circumcised and keep the law,’ to whom we gave no commandment; 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_25">25&#160;</span>it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_26">26&#160;</span>men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_27">27&#160;</span>We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_28">28&#160;</span>For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things: 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_29">29&#160;</span>that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual immorality, from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_30">30&#160;</span>So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_31">31&#160;</span>When they had read it, they rejoiced over the encouragement. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_32">32&#160;</span>Judas and Silas, also being prophets themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words and strengthened them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_33">33&#160;</span>After they had spent some time there, they were dismissed in peace from the brothers to the apostles. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_34">34&#160;</span> <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_35">35&#160;</span>But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC15_36">36&#160;</span>After some days Paul said to Barnabas, “Let’s return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_37">37&#160;</span>Barnabas planned to take John, who was called Mark, with them also. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_38">38&#160;</span>But Paul didn’t think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia, and didn’t go with them to do the work. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_39">39&#160;</span>Then the contention grew so sharp that they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him and sailed away to Cyprus, 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_40">40&#160;</span>but Paul chose Silas and went out, being commended by the brothers to the grace of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC15_41">41&#160;</span>He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the assemblies.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_1">1&#160;</span>He came to Derbe and Lystra; and behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed, but his father was a Greek. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_2">2&#160;</span>The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium gave a good testimony about him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_3">3&#160;</span>Paul wanted to have him go out with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those parts, for they all knew that his father was a Greek. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_4">4&#160;</span>As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_5">5&#160;</span>So the assemblies were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_6">6&#160;</span>When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_7">7&#160;</span>When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn’t allow them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_8">8&#160;</span>Passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_9">9&#160;</span>A vision appeared to Paul in the night. There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him and saying, “Come over into Macedonia and help us.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_10">10&#160;</span>When he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_11">11&#160;</span>Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis; 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_12">12&#160;</span>and from there to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the foremost of the district, a Roman colony. We were staying some days in this city. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_13">13&#160;</span>On the Sabbath day we went outside of the city by a riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_14">14&#160;</span>A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who worshiped God, heard us. The Lord opened her heart to listen to the things which were spoken by Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_15">15&#160;</span>When she and her household were baptized, she begged us, saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and stay.” So she persuaded us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_16">16&#160;</span>As we were going to prayer, a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by fortune telling. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_17">17&#160;</span>Following Paul and us, she cried out, “These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of salvation!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_18">18&#160;</span>She was doing this for many days. </div>
<div class='p'>But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, “I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!” It came out that very hour. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_19">19&#160;</span>But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_20">20&#160;</span>When they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, “These men, being Jews, are agitating our city 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_21">21&#160;</span>and advocate customs which it is not lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_22">22&#160;</span>The multitude rose up together against them and the magistrates tore their clothes from them, then commanded them to be beaten with rods. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_23">23&#160;</span>When they had laid many stripes on them, they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_24">24&#160;</span>Having received such a command, he threw them into the inner prison and secured their feet in the stocks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_25">25&#160;</span>But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_26">26&#160;</span>Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone’s bonds were loosened. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_27">27&#160;</span>The jailer, being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_28">28&#160;</span>But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, “Don’t harm yourself, for we are all here!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_29">29&#160;</span>He called for lights, sprang in, fell down trembling before Paul and Silas, 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_30">30&#160;</span>brought them out, and said, “Sirs, what must I do to be saved?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_31">31&#160;</span>They said, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved, you and your household.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_32">32&#160;</span>They spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all who were in his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_33">33&#160;</span>He took them the same hour of the night and washed their stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and all his household. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_34">34&#160;</span>He brought them up into his house and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly with all his household, having believed in God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_35">35&#160;</span>But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, “Let those men go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_36">36&#160;</span>The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, “The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out and go in peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_37">37&#160;</span>But Paul said to them, “They have beaten us publicly without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do they now release us secretly? No, most certainly, but let them come themselves and bring us out!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC16_38">38&#160;</span>The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans, 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_39">39&#160;</span>and they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they asked them to depart from the city. 
<span class="verse" id="AC16_40">40&#160;</span>They went out of the prison and entered into Lydia’s house. When they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them, then departed.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_1">1&#160;</span>Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_2">2&#160;</span>Paul, as was his custom, went in to them; and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures, 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_3">3&#160;</span>explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead, and saying, “This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_4">4&#160;</span>Some of them were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas: of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_5">5&#160;</span>But the unpersuaded Jews took along<a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> some wicked men from the marketplace and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the people. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_6">6&#160;</span>When they didn’t find them, they dragged Jason and certain brothers<a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> before the rulers of the city, crying, “These who have turned the world upside down have come here also, 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_7">7&#160;</span>whom Jason has received. These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_8">8&#160;</span>The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when they heard these things. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_9">9&#160;</span>When they had taken security from Jason and the rest, they let them go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_10">10&#160;</span>The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_11">11&#160;</span>Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_12">12&#160;</span>Many of them therefore believed; also of the prominent Greek women, and not a few men. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_13">13&#160;</span>But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also, they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_14">14&#160;</span>Then the brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas and Timothy still stayed there. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_15">15&#160;</span>But those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they should come to him very quickly, they departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_16">16&#160;</span>Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_17">17&#160;</span>So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who met him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_18">18&#160;</span>Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also<a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> were conversing with him. Some said, “What does this babbler want to say?” </div>
<div class='p'>Others said, “He seems to be advocating foreign deities,” because he preached Jesus and the resurrection. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_19">19&#160;</span>They took hold of him and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, “May we know what this new teaching is, which you are speaking about? 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_20">20&#160;</span>For you bring certain strange things to our ears. We want to know therefore what these things mean.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_21">21&#160;</span>Now all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_22">22&#160;</span>Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus and said, “You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_23">23&#160;</span>For as I passed along and observed the objects of your worship, I also found an altar with this inscription: ‘TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.’ What therefore you worship in ignorance, I announce to you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_24">24&#160;</span>The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, doesn’t dwell in temples made with hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_25">25&#160;</span>He isn’t served by men’s hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath and all things. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_26">26&#160;</span>He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons and the boundaries of their dwellings, 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_27">27&#160;</span>that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_28">28&#160;</span>‘For in him we live, move, and have our being.’ As some of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his offspring.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_29">29&#160;</span>Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone, engraved by art and design of man. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_30">30&#160;</span>The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all people everywhere should repent, 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_31">31&#160;</span>because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_32">32&#160;</span>Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, “We want to hear you again concerning this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC17_33">33&#160;</span>Thus Paul went out from among them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC17_34">34&#160;</span>But certain men joined with him and believed, including Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_1">1&#160;</span>After these things Paul departed from Athens and came to Corinth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_2">2&#160;</span>He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome. He came to them, 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_3">3&#160;</span>and because he practiced the same trade, he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_4">4&#160;</span>He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath and persuaded Jews and Greeks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_5">5&#160;</span>When Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_6">6&#160;</span>When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his clothing and said to them, “Your blood be on your own heads! I am clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_7">7&#160;</span>He departed there and went into the house of a certain man named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the synagogue. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_8">8&#160;</span>Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_9">9&#160;</span>The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision, <span class='wj'>“Don’t be afraid, but speak and don’t be silent; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_11">11&#160;</span>He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_12">12&#160;</span>But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat, 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_13">13&#160;</span>saying, “This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the law.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_14">14&#160;</span>But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, “If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime, you Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you; 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_15">15&#160;</span>but if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look to it yourselves. For I don’t want to be a judge of these matters.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_16">16&#160;</span>So he drove them from the judgment seat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_17">17&#160;</span>Then all the Greeks seized Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. Gallio didn’t care about any of these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_18">18&#160;</span>Paul, having stayed after this many more days, took his leave of the brothers,<a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and sailed from there for Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_19">19&#160;</span>He came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself entered into the synagogue and reasoned with the Jews. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_20">20&#160;</span>When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined; 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_21">21&#160;</span>but taking his leave of them, he said, “I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return again to you if God wills.” Then he set sail from Ephesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_22">22&#160;</span>When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the assembly, and went down to Antioch. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_23">23&#160;</span>Having spent some time there, he departed and went through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_24">24&#160;</span>Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_25">25&#160;</span>This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John. 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_26">26&#160;</span>He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC18_27">27&#160;</span>When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him; and wrote to the disciples to receive him. When he had come, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace; 
<span class="verse" id="AC18_28">28&#160;</span>for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_1">1&#160;</span>While Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus and found certain disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_2">2&#160;</span>He said to them, “Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?” </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “No, we haven’t even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_3">3&#160;</span>He said, “Into what then were you baptized?” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Into John’s baptism.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_4">4&#160;</span>Paul said, “John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him, that is, in Jesus.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_5">5&#160;</span>When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_6">6&#160;</span>When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them and they spoke with other languages and prophesied. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_7">7&#160;</span>They were about twelve men in all. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_8">8&#160;</span>He entered into the synagogue and spoke boldly for a period of three months, reasoning and persuading about the things concerning God’s Kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_9">9&#160;</span>But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed from them and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_10">10&#160;</span>This continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_11">11&#160;</span>God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul, 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_12">12&#160;</span>so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to the sick, and the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_13">13&#160;</span>But some of the itinerant Jews, exorcists, took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, “We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_14">14&#160;</span>There were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_15">15&#160;</span>The evil spirit answered, “Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?” 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_16">16&#160;</span>The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_17">17&#160;</span>This became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_18">18&#160;</span>Many also of those who had believed came, confessing and declaring their deeds. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_19">19&#160;</span>Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all. They counted their price, and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.<a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_20">20&#160;</span>So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_21">21&#160;</span>Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the Spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, “After I have been there, I must also see Rome.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_22">22&#160;</span>Having sent into Macedonia two of those who served him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_23">23&#160;</span>About that time there arose no small disturbance concerning the Way. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_24">24&#160;</span>For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen, 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_25">25&#160;</span>whom he gathered together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, “Sirs, you know that by this business we have our wealth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_26">26&#160;</span>You see and hear that not at Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying that they are no gods that are made with hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_27">27&#160;</span>Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as nothing and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worships.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_28">28&#160;</span>When they heard this they were filled with anger, and cried out, saying, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_29">29&#160;</span>The whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the theater, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul’s companions in travel. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_30">30&#160;</span>When Paul wanted to enter in to the people, the disciples didn’t allow him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_31">31&#160;</span>Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_32">32&#160;</span>Some therefore cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn’t know why they had come together. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_33">33&#160;</span>They brought Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made a defense to the people. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_34">34&#160;</span>But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out, “Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC19_35">35&#160;</span>When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, “You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn’t know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of the image which fell down from Zeus? 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_36">36&#160;</span>Seeing then that these things can’t be denied, you ought to be quiet and to do nothing rash. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_37">37&#160;</span>For you have brought these men here, who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_38">38&#160;</span>If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone, the courts are open and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one another. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_39">39&#160;</span>But if you seek anything about other matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_40">40&#160;</span>For indeed we are in danger of being accused concerning today’s riot, there being no cause. Concerning it, we wouldn’t be able to give an account of this commotion.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC19_41">41&#160;</span>When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_1">1&#160;</span>After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_2">2&#160;</span>When he had gone through those parts and had encouraged them with many words, he came into Greece. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_3">3&#160;</span>When he had spent three months there, and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_4">4&#160;</span>These accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea, Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians, Gaius of Derbe, Timothy, and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_5">5&#160;</span>But these had gone ahead, and were waiting for us at Troas. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_6">6&#160;</span>We sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where we stayed seven days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_7">7&#160;</span>On the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day; and continued his speech until midnight. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_8">8&#160;</span>There were many lights in the upper room where we<a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> were gathered together. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_9">9&#160;</span>A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third floor and was taken up dead. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_10">10&#160;</span>Paul went down and fell upon him, and embracing him said, “Don’t be troubled, for his life is in him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_11">11&#160;</span>When he had gone up, had broken bread and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he departed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_12">12&#160;</span>They brought the boy in alive, and were greatly comforted. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_13">13&#160;</span>But we, going ahead to the ship, set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there; for he had so arranged, intending himself to go by land. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_14">14&#160;</span>When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard and came to Mitylene. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_15">15&#160;</span>Sailing from there, we came the following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_16">16&#160;</span>For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_17">17&#160;</span>From Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called to himself the elders of the assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_18">18&#160;</span>When they had come to him, he said to them, “You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia, how I was with you all the time, 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_19">19&#160;</span>serving the Lord with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plots of the Jews; 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_20">20&#160;</span>how I didn’t shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to house, 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_21">21&#160;</span>testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus.<a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_22">22&#160;</span>Now, behold, I go bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there; 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_23">23&#160;</span>except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_24">24&#160;</span>But these things don’t count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully testify to the Good News of the grace of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_25">25&#160;</span>“Now, behold, I know that you all, among whom I went about preaching God’s Kingdom, will see my face no more. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore I testify to you today that I am clean from the blood of all men, 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_27">27&#160;</span>for I didn’t shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_28">28&#160;</span>Take heed, therefore, to yourselves and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and<a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> God which he purchased with his own blood. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_29">29&#160;</span>For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_30">30&#160;</span>Men will arise from among your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore watch, remembering that for a period of three years I didn’t cease to admonish everyone night and day with tears. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_32">32&#160;</span>Now, brothers,<a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> I entrust you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_33">33&#160;</span>I coveted no one’s silver, gold, or clothing. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_34">34&#160;</span>You yourselves know that these hands served my necessities, and those who were with me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_35">35&#160;</span>In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, <span class='wj'>‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’</span>” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC20_36">36&#160;</span>When he had spoken these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all. 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_37">37&#160;</span>They all wept freely, and fell on Paul’s neck and kissed him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC20_38">38&#160;</span>sorrowing most of all because of the word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. Then they accompanied him to the ship.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_1">1&#160;</span>When we had departed from them and had set sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_2">2&#160;</span>Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard and set sail. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_3">3&#160;</span>When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria and landed at Tyre, for the ship was there to unload her cargo. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_4">4&#160;</span>Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said to Paul through the Spirit that he should not go up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_5">5&#160;</span>When those days were over, we departed and went on our journey. They all, with wives and children, brought us on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_6">6&#160;</span>After saying goodbye to each other, we went on board the ship, and they returned home again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_7">7&#160;</span>When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers and stayed with them one day. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_8">8&#160;</span>On the next day, we who were Paul’s companions departed and came to Caesarea. </div>
<div class='p'>We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_9">9&#160;</span>Now this man had four virgin daughters who prophesied. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_10">10&#160;</span>As we stayed there some days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_11">11&#160;</span>Coming to us and taking Paul’s belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, “The Holy Spirit says: ‘So the Jews at Jerusalem will bind the man who owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_12">12&#160;</span>When we heard these things, both we and the people of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_13">13&#160;</span>Then Paul answered, “What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_14">14&#160;</span>When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, “The Lord’s will be done.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_15">15&#160;</span>After these days we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_16">16&#160;</span>Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we would stay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_17">17&#160;</span>When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_18">18&#160;</span>The day following, Paul went in with us to James; and all the elders were present. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_19">19&#160;</span>When he had greeted them, he reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through his ministry. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_20">20&#160;</span>They, when they heard it, glorified God. They said to him, “You see, brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for the law. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_21">21&#160;</span>They have been informed about you, that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children and not to walk after the customs. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_22">22&#160;</span>What then? The assembly must certainly meet, for they will hear that you have come. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_23">23&#160;</span>Therefore do what we tell you. We have four men who have taken a vow. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_24">24&#160;</span>Take them and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads. Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the law. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_25">25&#160;</span>But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_26">26&#160;</span>Then Paul took the men, and the next day purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_27">27&#160;</span>When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and laid hands on him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_28">28&#160;</span>crying out, “Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple and has defiled this holy place!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_29">29&#160;</span>For they had seen Trophimus the Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_30">30&#160;</span>All the city was moved and the people ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors were shut. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_31">31&#160;</span>As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_32">32&#160;</span>Immediately he took soldiers and centurions and ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_33">33&#160;</span>Then the commanding officer came near, arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done. 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_34">34&#160;</span>Some shouted one thing and some another, among the crowd. When he couldn’t find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_35">35&#160;</span>When he came to the stairs, he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd; 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_36">36&#160;</span>for the multitude of the people followed after, crying out, “Away with him!” 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_37">37&#160;</span>As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, “May I speak to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Do you know Greek? 
<span class="verse" id="AC21_38">38&#160;</span>Aren’t you then the Egyptian who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_39">39&#160;</span>But Paul said, “I am a Jew from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC21_40">40&#160;</span>When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_1">1&#160;</span>“Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_2">2&#160;</span>When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet. </div>
<div class='p'>He said, 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_3">3&#160;</span>“I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as you all are today. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_4">4&#160;</span>I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women, 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_5">5&#160;</span>as also the high priest and all the council of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the brothers, and traveled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_6">6&#160;</span>“As I made my journey and came close to Damascus, about noon suddenly a great light shone around me from the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_7">7&#160;</span>I fell to the ground and heard a voice saying to me, <span class='wj'>‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_8">8&#160;</span>I answered, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ He said to me, <span class='wj'>‘I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_9">9&#160;</span>“Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid, but they didn’t understand the voice of him who spoke to me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_10">10&#160;</span>I said, ‘What shall I do, Lord?’ The Lord said to me, <span class='wj'>‘Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told about all things which are appointed for you to do.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_11">11&#160;</span>When I couldn’t see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into Damascus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_12">12&#160;</span>“One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus, 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_13">13&#160;</span>came to me, and standing by me said to me, ‘Brother Saul, receive your sight!’ In that very hour I looked up at him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_14">14&#160;</span>He said, ‘The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_15">15&#160;</span>For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_16">16&#160;</span>Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_17">17&#160;</span>“When I had returned to Jerusalem and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_18">18&#160;</span>and saw him saying to me, <span class='wj'>‘Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive testimony concerning me from you.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_19">19&#160;</span>I said, ‘Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_20">20&#160;</span>When the blood of Stephen, your witness, was shed, I also was standing by, consenting to his death, and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_21">21&#160;</span>“He said to me, <span class='wj'>‘Depart, for I will send you out far from here to the Gentiles.’</span>” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_22">22&#160;</span>They listened to him until he said that; then they lifted up their voice and said, “Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn’t fit to live!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_23">23&#160;</span>As they cried out, threw off their cloaks, and threw dust into the air, 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_24">24&#160;</span>the commanding officer commanded him to be brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging, that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_25">25&#160;</span>When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the centurion who stood by, “Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman, and not found guilty?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_26">26&#160;</span>When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding officer and told him, “Watch what you are about to do, for this man is a Roman!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_27">27&#160;</span>The commanding officer came and asked him, “Tell me, are you a Roman?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Yes.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_28">28&#160;</span>The commanding officer answered, “I bought my citizenship for a great price.” </div>
<div class='p'>Paul said, “But I was born a Roman.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC22_29">29&#160;</span>Immediately those who were about to examine him departed from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized that he was a Roman, because he had bound him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC22_30">30&#160;</span>But on the next day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews, he freed him from the bonds and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_1">1&#160;</span>Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, “Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until today.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_2">2&#160;</span>The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_3">3&#160;</span>Then Paul said to him, “God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me to be struck contrary to the law?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_4">4&#160;</span>Those who stood by said, “Do you malign God’s high priest?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_5">5&#160;</span>Paul said, “I didn’t know, brothers, that he was high priest. For it is written, ‘You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.’ ”<a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_6">6&#160;</span>But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, “Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_7">7&#160;</span>When he had said this, an argument arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the crowd was divided. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_8">8&#160;</span>For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess all of these. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_9">9&#160;</span>A great clamor arose, and some of the scribes of the Pharisees’ part stood up, and contended, saying, “We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him, let’s not fight against God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_10">10&#160;</span>When a great argument arose, the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them and bring him into the barracks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_11">11&#160;</span>The following night, the Lord stood by him and said, <span class='wj'>“Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must testify also at Rome.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_12">12&#160;</span>When it was day, some of the Jews banded together and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_13">13&#160;</span>There were more than forty people who had made this conspiracy. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_14">14&#160;</span>They came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, “We have bound ourselves under a great curse to taste nothing until we have killed Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_15">15&#160;</span>Now therefore, you with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly. We are ready to kill him before he comes near.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_16">16&#160;</span>But Paul’s sister’s son heard they were lying in wait, and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_17">17&#160;</span>Paul summoned one of the centurions and said, “Bring this young man to the commanding officer, for he has something to tell him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_18">18&#160;</span>So he took him and brought him to the commanding officer and said, “Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked me to bring this young man to you. He has something to tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_19">19&#160;</span>The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going aside, asked him privately, “What is it that you have to tell me?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_20">20&#160;</span>He said, “The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore don’t yield to them, for more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a curse to neither eat nor drink until they have killed him. Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_22">22&#160;</span>So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging him, “Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_23">23&#160;</span>He called to himself two of the centurions, and said, “Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy horsemen and two hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the night.”<a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_24">24&#160;</span>He asked them to provide mounts, that they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to Felix the governor. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_25">25&#160;</span>He wrote a letter like this: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_26">26&#160;</span>“Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_27">27&#160;</span>“This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_28">28&#160;</span>Desiring to know the cause why they accused him, I brought him down to their council. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_29">29&#160;</span>I found him to be accused about questions of their law, but not to be charged with anything worthy of death or of imprisonment. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_30">30&#160;</span>When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately, charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him before you. Farewell.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC23_31">31&#160;</span>So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_32">32&#160;</span>But on the next day they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_33">33&#160;</span>When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they also presented Paul to him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_34">34&#160;</span>When the governor had read it, he asked what province he was from. When he understood that he was from Cilicia, he said, 
<span class="verse" id="AC23_35">35&#160;</span>“I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive.” He commanded that he be kept in Herod’s palace.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_1">1&#160;</span>After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor against Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_2">2&#160;</span>When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, “Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that prosperity is coming to this nation by your foresight, 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_3">3&#160;</span>we accept it in all ways and in all places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_4">4&#160;</span>But that I don’t delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_5">5&#160;</span>For we have found this man to be a plague, an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_6">6&#160;</span>He even tried to profane the temple, and we arrested him.<a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_7">7&#160;</span> <a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_8">8&#160;</span> <a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_9">9&#160;</span>The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these things were so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_10">10&#160;</span>When the governor had beckoned to him to speak, Paul answered, “Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense, 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_11">11&#160;</span>seeing that you can verify that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_12">12&#160;</span>In the temple they didn’t find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues or in the city. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_13">13&#160;</span>Nor can they prove to you the things of which they now accuse me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_14">14&#160;</span>But this I confess to you, that according to the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which are written in the prophets; 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_15">15&#160;</span>having hope toward God, which these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_16">16&#160;</span>In this I also practice always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_17">17&#160;</span>Now after some years, I came to bring gifts for the needy to my nation, and offerings; 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_18">18&#160;</span>amid which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a mob, nor with turmoil. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_19">19&#160;</span>They ought to have been here before you and to make accusation if they had anything against me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_20">20&#160;</span>Or else let these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council, 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_21">21&#160;</span>unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among them, ‘Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before you today!’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_22">22&#160;</span>But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, “When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will decide your case.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_23">23&#160;</span>He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody and should have some privileges, and not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_24">24&#160;</span>After some days, Felix came with Drusilla his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_25">25&#160;</span>As he reasoned about righteousness, self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and answered, “Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me, I will summon you.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC24_26">26&#160;</span>Meanwhile, he also hoped that money would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also he sent for him more often and talked with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC24_27">27&#160;</span>But when two years were fulfilled, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_1">1&#160;</span>Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_2">2&#160;</span>Then the high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they begged him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_3">3&#160;</span>asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem, plotting to kill him on the way. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_4">4&#160;</span>However Festus answered that Paul should be kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart shortly. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_5">5&#160;</span>“Let them therefore”, he said, “that are in power among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_6">6&#160;</span>When he had stayed among them more than ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat, and commanded Paul to be brought. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_7">7&#160;</span>When he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove, 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_8">8&#160;</span>while he said in his defense, “Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_9">9&#160;</span>But Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered Paul and said, “Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem and be judged by me there concerning these things?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_10">10&#160;</span>But Paul said, “I am standing before Caesar’s judgment seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_11">11&#160;</span>For if I have done wrong and have committed anything worthy of death, I don’t refuse to die; but if none of those things is true that they accuse me of, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_12">12&#160;</span>Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, “You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you shall go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_13">13&#160;</span>Now when some days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea and greeted Festus. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_14">14&#160;</span>As he stayed there many days, Festus laid Paul’s case before the king, saying, “There is a certain man left a prisoner by Felix; 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_15">15&#160;</span>about whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for a sentence against him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_16">16&#160;</span>I answered them that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction before the accused has met the accusers face to face and has had opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_17">17&#160;</span>When therefore they had come together here, I didn’t delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment seat and commanded the man to be brought. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_18">18&#160;</span>When the accusers stood up, they brought no charges against him of such things as I supposed; 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_19">19&#160;</span>but had certain questions against him about their own religion and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_20">20&#160;</span>Being perplexed how to inquire concerning these things, I asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_21">21&#160;</span>But when Paul had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept until I could send him to Caesar.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_22">22&#160;</span>Agrippa said to Festus, “I also would like to hear the man myself.” </div>
<div class='p'>“Tomorrow,” he said, “you shall hear him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC25_23">23&#160;</span>So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the commanding officers and the principal men of the city, at the command of Festus, Paul was brought in. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_24">24&#160;</span>Festus said, “King Agrippa, and all men who are here present with us, you see this man about whom all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_25">25&#160;</span>But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself appealed to the emperor, I determined to send him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_26">26&#160;</span>of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him out before you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examination I may have something to write. 
<span class="verse" id="AC25_27">27&#160;</span>For it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges against him.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_1">1&#160;</span>Agrippa said to Paul, “You may speak for yourself.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_2">2&#160;</span>“I think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defense before you today concerning all the things that I am accused by the Jews, 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_3">3&#160;</span>especially because you are expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_4">4&#160;</span>“Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_5">5&#160;</span>having known me from the first, if they are willing to testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_6">6&#160;</span>Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers, 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_7">7&#160;</span>which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa! 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_8">8&#160;</span>Why is it judged incredible with you if God does raise the dead? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_9">9&#160;</span>“I myself most certainly thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_10">10&#160;</span>I also did this in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests; and when they were put to death I gave my vote against them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_11">11&#160;</span>Punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_12">12&#160;</span>“Whereupon as I traveled to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests, 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_13">13&#160;</span>at noon, O king, I saw on the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those who traveled with me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_14">14&#160;</span>When we had all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, <span class='wj'>‘Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_15">15&#160;</span>“I said, ‘Who are you, Lord?’ </div>
<div class='p'>“He said, <span class='wj'>‘I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But arise, and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen and of the things which I will reveal to you; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>delivering you from the people and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_19">19&#160;</span>“Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_20">20&#160;</span>but declared first to them of Damascus, at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_21">21&#160;</span>For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple and tried to kill me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_22">22&#160;</span>Having therefore obtained the help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen, 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_23">23&#160;</span>how the Christ must suffer, and how, by the resurrection of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both to these people and to the Gentiles.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_24">24&#160;</span>As he thus made his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, “Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_25">25&#160;</span>But he said, “I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_26">26&#160;</span>For the king knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_27">27&#160;</span>King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_28">28&#160;</span>Agrippa said to Paul, “With a little persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_29">29&#160;</span>Paul said, “I pray to God, that whether with little or with much, not only you, but also all that hear me today, might become such as I am, except for these bonds.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC26_30">30&#160;</span>The king rose up with the governor and Bernice, and those who sat with them. 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_31">31&#160;</span>When they had withdrawn, they spoke to one another, saying, “This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC26_32">32&#160;</span>Agrippa said to Festus, “This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_1">1&#160;</span>When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_2">2&#160;</span>Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica being with us. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_3">3&#160;</span>The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly and gave him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_4">4&#160;</span>Putting to sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_5">5&#160;</span>When we had sailed across the sea which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_6">6&#160;</span>There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us on board. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_7">7&#160;</span>When we had sailed slowly many days, and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_8">8&#160;</span>With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_9">9&#160;</span>When much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_10">10&#160;</span>and said to them, “Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_11">11&#160;</span>But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_12">12&#160;</span>Because the haven was not suitable to winter in, the majority advised going to sea from there, if by any means they could reach Phoenix and winter there, which is a port of Crete, looking southwest and northwest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_13">13&#160;</span>When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete, close to shore. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_14">14&#160;</span>But before long, a stormy wind beat down from shore, which is called Euroclydon.<a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_15">15&#160;</span>When the ship was caught and couldn’t face the wind, we gave way to it and were driven along. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_16">16&#160;</span>Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_17">17&#160;</span>After they had hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven along. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_18">18&#160;</span>As we labored exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things overboard. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_19">19&#160;</span>On the third day, they threw out the ship’s tackle with their own hands. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_20">20&#160;</span>When neither sun nor stars shone on us for many days, and no small storm pressed on us, all hope that we would be saved was now taken away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_21">21&#160;</span>When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the middle of them and said, “Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not have set sail from Crete and have gotten this injury and loss. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_22">22&#160;</span>Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_23">23&#160;</span>For there stood by me this night an angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve, 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_24">24&#160;</span>saying, ‘Don’t be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail with you.’ 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_26">26&#160;</span>But we must run aground on a certain island.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_27">27&#160;</span>But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_28">28&#160;</span>They took soundings and found twenty fathoms.<a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> After a little while, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms.<a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_29">29&#160;</span>Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for daylight. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_30">30&#160;</span>As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow, 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_31">31&#160;</span>Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, “Unless these stay in the ship, you can’t be saved.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_32">32&#160;</span>Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat and let it fall off. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_33">33&#160;</span>While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take some food, saying, “Today is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_34">34&#160;</span>Therefore I beg you to take some food, for this is for your safety; for not a hair will perish from any of your heads.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_35">35&#160;</span>When he had said this and had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all; then he broke it and began to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_36">36&#160;</span>Then they all cheered up, and they also took food. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_37">37&#160;</span>In all, we were two hundred seventy-six souls on the ship. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_38">38&#160;</span>When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_39">39&#160;</span>When it was day, they didn’t recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_40">40&#160;</span>Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_41">41&#160;</span>But coming to a place where two seas met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable, but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC27_42">42&#160;</span>The soldiers’ counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape. 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_43">43&#160;</span>But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go toward the land; 
<span class="verse" id="AC27_44">44&#160;</span>and the rest should follow, some on planks and some on other things from the ship. So they all escaped safely to the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='AC28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_1">1&#160;</span>When we had escaped, then they<a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> learned that the island was called Malta. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_2">2&#160;</span>The natives showed us uncommon kindness; for they kindled a fire and received us all, because of the present rain and because of the cold. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_3">3&#160;</span>But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat and fastened on his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_4">4&#160;</span>When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to one another, “No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not allowed to live.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_5">5&#160;</span>However he shook off the creature into the fire, and wasn’t harmed. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_6">6&#160;</span>But they expected that he would have swollen or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they watched for a long time and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds and said that he was a god. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_7">7&#160;</span>Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us and courteously entertained us for three days. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_8">8&#160;</span>The father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_9">9&#160;</span>Then when this was done, the rest also who had diseases in the island came and were cured. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_10">10&#160;</span>They also honored us with many honors; and when we sailed, they put on board the things that we needed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_11">11&#160;</span>After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose figurehead was “The Twin Brothers.” 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_12">12&#160;</span>Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three days. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_13">13&#160;</span>From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli, 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_14">14&#160;</span>where we found brothers,<a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and were entreated to stay with them for seven days. So we came to Rome. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_15">15&#160;</span>From there the brothers, when they heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns. When Paul saw them, he thanked God and took courage. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_16">16&#160;</span>When we entered into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_17">17&#160;</span>After three days Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said to them, “I, brothers, though I had done nothing against the people or the customs of our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans, 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_18">18&#160;</span>who, when they had examined me, desired to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_19">19&#160;</span>But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_20">20&#160;</span>For this cause therefore I asked to see you and to speak with you. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_21">21&#160;</span>They said to him, “We neither received letters from Judea concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or speak any evil of you. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_22">22&#160;</span>But we desire to hear from you what you think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_23">23&#160;</span>When they had appointed him a day, many people came to him at his lodging. He explained to them, testifying about God’s Kingdom, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_24">24&#160;</span>Some believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved. 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_25">25&#160;</span>When they didn’t agree among themselves, they departed after Paul had spoken one message: “The Holy Spirit spoke rightly through Isaiah the prophet to our fathers, 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_26">26&#160;</span>saying, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Go to this people and say, </div>
<div class='q'>in hearing, you will hear, </div>
<div class='q2'>but will in no way understand. </div>
<div class='q'>In seeing, you will see, </div>
<div class='q2'>but will in no way perceive. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_27">27&#160;</span>For this people’s heart has grown callous. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their ears are dull of hearing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their eyes they have closed. </div>
<div class='q'>Lest they should see with their eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>hear with their ears, </div>
<div class='q2'>understand with their heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and would turn again, </div>
<div class='q2'>then I would heal them.’<a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_28">28&#160;</span>“Be it known therefore to you that the salvation of God is sent to the nations, and they will listen.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_29">29&#160;</span>When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a great dispute among themselves.<a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="AC28_30">30&#160;</span>Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house and received all who were coming to him, 
<span class="verse" id="AC28_31">31&#160;</span>preaching God’s Kingdom and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC1_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:10</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “ἰδοὺ”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC1_20"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:20</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_25'>Psalm 69:25</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC1_20"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:20</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS109_8'>Psalm 109:8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:15</a>
 <span class="ft">about 9:00 a.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_21"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:21</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JOL.xhtml#JL2_28'>Joel 2:28-32</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:27</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_28"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:28</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_8'>Psalm 16:8-11</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_30"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2:30</a>
 <span class="ft">“Christ” means “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_31"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2:31</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC2_35"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:35</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_1'>Psalm 110:1</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:1</a>
 <span class="ft">3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC3_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC3_23"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 3:23</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_15'>Deuteronomy 18:15,18-19</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC3_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3:25</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC3_25"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 3:25</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN22_18'>Genesis 22:18</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN26_4'>26:4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC4_11"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:11</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>Psalm 118:22</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC4_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:26</a>
 <span class="ft">Christ (Greek) and Messiah (Hebrew) both mean Anointed One.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC4_26"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:26</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_1'>Psalm 2:1-2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC4_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:27</a>
 <span class="ft">nu adds “in this city,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hellenists used Greek language and culture, even though they were also of Hebrew descent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_3"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:3</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN12_1'>Genesis 12:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_7"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:7</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN15_13'>Genesis 15:13-14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:23</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_28"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:28</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_14'>Exodus 2:14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_32"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:32</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_6'>Exodus 3:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_34"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:34</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_5'>Exodus 3:5,7-8,10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:37</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “You shall listen to him.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_37"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:37</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT18_15'>Deuteronomy 18:15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_40"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:40</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_1'>Exodus 32:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_42"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7:42</a>
 <span class="ft">This idiom could also be translated “host of heaven”, or “angelic beings”, or “heavenly bodies.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_43"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:43</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='AMO.xhtml#AM5_25'>Amos 5:25-27</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC7_50"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:50</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_1'>Isaiah 66:1-2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC8_33"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:33</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_7'>Isaiah 53:7,8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC8_37"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:37</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds </span><span class="fqa">Philip said, “If you believe with all your heart, you may.” He answered, “I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:5</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “It’s hard for you to kick against the cattle prods.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:6</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “But” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:11</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Judas</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_28"><span class="notemark">§</span> 9:28</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU add “and going out” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:29</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU omit “Jesus” and reverse the order of verses 28 &amp; 29.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:29</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hellenists were Hebrews who used Greek language and culture.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_30"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:30</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_36"><span class="notemark">§</span> 9:36</a>
 <span class="ft">“Dorcas” is Greek for “Gazelle.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC9_38"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:38</a>
 <span class="ft">Reading from NU, TR; MT omits “two men”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC10_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:3</a>
 <span class="ft">3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC10_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10:6</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “This one will tell you what it is necessary for you to do.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC10_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10:19</a>
 <span class="ft">Reading from TR and NU. MT omits “three”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC10_30"><span class="notemark">§</span> 10:30</a>
 <span class="ft">3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC10_39"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:39</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “also”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC11_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11:20</a>
 <span class="ft">A Hellenist is someone who keeps Greek customs and culture.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC12_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:25</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “from” instead of “to”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:17</a>
 <span class="ft">TR, NU add “Israel”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:23</a>
 <span class="ft">TR, NU read “a Savior, Jesus” instead of “salvation”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13:24</a>
 <span class="ft">TR, NU read “to all the people of Israel” instead of “to Israel”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_33"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:33</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_7'>Psalm 2:7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_34"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:34</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_3'>Isaiah 55:3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_35"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:35</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_10'>Psalm 16:10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_38"><span class="notemark">§</span> 13:38</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_41"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:41</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='HAB.xhtml#HK1_5'>Habakkuk 1:5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC13_47"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:47</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_6'>Isaiah 49:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC14_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, disobedient</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC14_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:17</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “us” instead of “you”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC15_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC15_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “Christ”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC15_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='AMO.xhtml#AM9_11'>Amos 9:11-12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC15_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15:22</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC15_34"><span class="notemark">§</span> 15:34</a>
 <span class="ft">Some manuscripts add: </span><span class="fqa">But it seemed good to Silas to stay there. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:5</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “And the Jews who were unpersuaded, becoming envious and taking along” instead of “But the unpersuaded Jews took along”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC17_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC17_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:18</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “also” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC18_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18:18</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC19_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:19</a>
 <span class="ft">The 50,000 pieces of silver here probably referred to 50,000 drachmas. If so, the value of the burned books was equivalent to about 160 man-years of wages for agricultural laborers</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC20_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “they” instead of “we”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC20_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:21</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “Christ”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC20_28"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20:28</a>
 <span class="ft">TR, NU omit “the Lord and”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC20_32"><span class="notemark">§</span> 20:32</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where the context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC23_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 23:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_28'>Exodus 22:28</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC23_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:23</a>
 <span class="ft">about 9:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC24_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:6</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “We wanted to judge him according to our law,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC24_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24:7</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “but the commanding officer, Lysias, came by and with great violence took him out of our hands,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC24_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 24:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “commanding his accusers to come to you.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC27_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, “a northeaster”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC27_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:28</a>
 <span class="ft">20 fathoms = 120 feet = 36.6 meters</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC27_28"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27:28</a>
 <span class="ft">15 fathoms = 90 feet = 27.4 meters</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC28_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28:1</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “we”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC28_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28:14</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC28_27"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 28:27</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_9'>Isaiah 6:9-10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#AC28_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 28:29</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 29.</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
