<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Exodus 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Exodus</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='EXO.xhtml#EX40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='EX0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Second Book of Moses, </div>
<div class='mt3'>Commonly Called </div>
<div class='mt'>Exodus  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="EX1_1">1&#160;</span>Now these are the names of the sons of Israel, who came into Egypt (every man and his household came with Jacob): 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_2">2&#160;</span>Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_3">3&#160;</span>Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin, 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_4">4&#160;</span>Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_5">5&#160;</span>All the souls who came out of Jacob’s body were seventy souls, and Joseph was in Egypt already. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_6">6&#160;</span>Joseph died, as did all his brothers, and all that generation. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_7">7&#160;</span>The children of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and grew exceedingly mighty; and the land was filled with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_8">8&#160;</span>Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who didn’t know Joseph. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_9">9&#160;</span>He said to his people, “Behold,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the people of the children of Israel are more and mightier than we. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_10">10&#160;</span>Come, let’s deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it happen that when any war breaks out, they also join themselves to our enemies and fight against us, and escape out of the land.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore they set taskmasters over them to afflict them with their burdens. They built storage cities for Pharaoh: Pithom and Raamses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_12">12&#160;</span>But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and the more they spread out. They started to dread the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_13">13&#160;</span>The Egyptians ruthlessly made the children of Israel serve, 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_14">14&#160;</span>and they made their lives bitter with hard service in mortar and in brick, and in all kinds of service in the field, all their service, in which they ruthlessly made them serve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_15">15&#160;</span>The king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah, 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_16">16&#160;</span>and he said, “When you perform the duty of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them on the birth stool, if it is a son, then you shall kill him; but if it is a daughter, then she shall live.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_17">17&#160;</span>But the midwives feared God,<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and didn’t do what the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the baby boys alive. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_18">18&#160;</span>The king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said to them, “Why have you done this thing and saved the boys alive?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_19">19&#160;</span>The midwives said to Pharaoh, “Because the Hebrew women aren’t like the Egyptian women; for they are vigorous and give birth before the midwife comes to them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX1_20">20&#160;</span>God dealt well with the midwives, and the people multiplied, and grew very mighty. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_21">21&#160;</span>Because the midwives feared God, he gave them families. 
<span class="verse" id="EX1_22">22&#160;</span>Pharaoh commanded all his people, saying, “You shall cast every son who is born into the river, and every daughter you shall save alive.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_1">1&#160;</span>A man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi as his wife. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_2">2&#160;</span>The woman conceived and bore a son. When she saw that he was a fine child, she hid him three months. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_3">3&#160;</span>When she could no longer hide him, she took a papyrus basket for him, and coated it with tar and with pitch. She put the child in it, and laid it in the reeds by the river’s bank. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_4">4&#160;</span>His sister stood far off, to see what would be done to him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_5">5&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s daughter came down to bathe at the river. Her maidens walked along by the riverside. She saw the basket among the reeds, and sent her servant to get it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_6">6&#160;</span>She opened it, and saw the child, and behold, the baby cried. She had compassion on him, and said, “This is one of the Hebrews’ children.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_7">7&#160;</span>Then his sister said to Pharaoh’s daughter, “Should I go and call a nurse for you from the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_8">8&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Go.” </div>
<div class='p'>The young woman went and called the child’s mother. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_9">9&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s daughter said to her, “Take this child away, and nurse him for me, and I will give you your wages.” </div>
<div class='p'>The woman took the child, and nursed it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_10">10&#160;</span>The child grew, and she brought him to Pharaoh’s daughter, and he became her son. She named him Moses,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and said, “Because I drew him out of the water.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_11">11&#160;</span>In those days, when Moses had grown up, he went out to his brothers and saw their burdens. He saw an Egyptian striking a Hebrew, one of his brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_12">12&#160;</span>He looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no one, he killed the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_13">13&#160;</span>He went out the second day, and behold, two men of the Hebrews were fighting with each other. He said to him who did the wrong, “Why do you strike your fellow?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_14">14&#160;</span>He said, “Who made you a prince and a judge over us? Do you plan to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian?” </div>
<div class='p'>Moses was afraid, and said, “Surely this thing is known.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_15">15&#160;</span>Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and lived in the land of Midian, and he sat down by a well. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_16">16&#160;</span>Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters. They came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father’s flock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_17">17&#160;</span>The shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_18">18&#160;</span>When they came to Reuel, their father, he said, “How is it that you have returned so early today?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_19">19&#160;</span>They said, “An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and moreover he drew water for us, and watered the flock.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_20">20&#160;</span>He said to his daughters, “Where is he? Why is it that you have left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_21">21&#160;</span>Moses was content to dwell with the man. He gave Moses Zipporah, his daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_22">22&#160;</span>She bore a son, and he named him Gershom,<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> for he said, “I have lived as a foreigner in a foreign land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX2_23">23&#160;</span>In the course of those many days, the king of Egypt died, and the children of Israel sighed because of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up to God because of the bondage. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_24">24&#160;</span>God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="EX2_25">25&#160;</span>God saw the children of Israel, and God understood.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_1">1&#160;</span>Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the back of the wilderness, and came to God’s mountain, to Horeb. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh’s<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> angel appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the middle of a bush. He looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_3">3&#160;</span>Moses said, “I will go now, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burned.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_4">4&#160;</span>When Yahweh saw that he came over to see, God called to him out of the middle of the bush, and said, “Moses! Moses!” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Here I am.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_5">5&#160;</span>He said, “Don’t come close. Take off your sandals, for the place you are standing on is holy ground.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_6">6&#160;</span>Moreover he said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” </div>
<div class='p'>Moses hid his face because he was afraid to look at God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh said, “I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_8">8&#160;</span>I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land to a good and large land, to a land flowing with milk and honey; to the place of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_9">9&#160;</span>Now, behold, the cry of the children of Israel has come to me. Moreover I have seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_10">10&#160;</span>Come now therefore, and I will send you to Pharaoh, that you may bring my people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_11">11&#160;</span>Moses said to God, “Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring the children of Israel out of Egypt?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_12">12&#160;</span>He said, “Certainly I will be with you. This will be the token to you, that I have sent you: when you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God on this mountain.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_13">13&#160;</span>Moses said to God, “Behold, when I come to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ and they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ what should I tell them?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX3_14">14&#160;</span>God said to Moses, “I AM WHO I AM,” and he said, “You shall tell the children of Israel this: ‘I AM has sent me to you.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_15">15&#160;</span>God said moreover to Moses, “You shall tell the children of Israel this, ‘Yahweh, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you.’ This is my name forever, and this is my memorial to all generations. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_16">16&#160;</span>Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and tell them, ‘Yahweh, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, “I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_17">17&#160;</span>I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, to a land flowing with milk and honey.” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_18">18&#160;</span>They will listen to your voice. You shall come, you and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and you shall tell him, ‘Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. Now please let us go three days’ journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to Yahweh, our God.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_19">19&#160;</span>I know that the king of Egypt won’t give you permission to go, no, not by a mighty hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_20">20&#160;</span>I will reach out my hand and strike Egypt with all my wonders which I will do among them, and after that he will let you go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_21">21&#160;</span>I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, and it will happen that when you go, you shall not go empty-handed. 
<span class="verse" id="EX3_22">22&#160;</span>But every woman shall ask of her neighbor, and of her who visits her house, jewels of silver, jewels of gold, and clothing. You shall put them on your sons, and on your daughters. You shall plunder the Egyptians.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_1">1&#160;</span>Moses answered, “But, behold, they will not believe me, nor listen to my voice; for they will say, ‘Yahweh has not appeared to you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh said to him, “What is that in your hand?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “A rod.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_3">3&#160;</span>He said, “Throw it on the ground.” </div>
<div class='p'>He threw it on the ground, and it became a snake; and Moses ran away from it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand, and take it by the tail.” </div>
<div class='p'>He stretched out his hand, and took hold of it, and it became a rod in his hand. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_5">5&#160;</span>“This is so that they may believe that Yahweh, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to you.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh said furthermore to him, “Now put your hand inside your cloak.” </div>
<div class='p'>He put his hand inside his cloak, and when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as white as snow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_7">7&#160;</span>He said, “Put your hand inside your cloak again.” </div>
<div class='p'>He put his hand inside his cloak again, and when he took it out of his cloak, behold, it had turned again as his other flesh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_8">8&#160;</span>“It will happen, if they will not believe you or listen to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_9">9&#160;</span>It will happen, if they will not believe even these two signs or listen to your voice, that you shall take of the water of the river, and pour it on the dry land. The water which you take out of the river will become blood on the dry land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_10">10&#160;</span>Moses said to Yahweh, “O Lord,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I am not eloquent, neither before now, nor since you have spoken to your servant; for I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh said to him, “Who made man’s mouth? Or who makes one mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Isn’t it I, Yahweh? 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_12">12&#160;</span>Now therefore go, and I will be with your mouth, and teach you what you shall speak.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_13">13&#160;</span>Moses said, “Oh, Lord, please send someone else.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh’s anger burned against Moses, and he said, “What about Aaron, your brother, the Levite? I know that he can speak well. Also, behold, he is coming out to meet you. When he sees you, he will be glad in his heart. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_15">15&#160;</span>You shall speak to him, and put the words in his mouth. I will be with your mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what you shall do. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_16">16&#160;</span>He will be your spokesman to the people. It will happen that he will be to you a mouth, and you will be to him as God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_17">17&#160;</span>You shall take this rod in your hand, with which you shall do the signs.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_18">18&#160;</span>Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said to him, “Please let me go and return to my brothers who are in Egypt, and see whether they are still alive.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jethro said to Moses, “Go in peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses in Midian, “Go, return into Egypt; for all the men who sought your life are dead.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_20">20&#160;</span>Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them on a donkey, and he returned to the land of Egypt. Moses took God’s rod in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “When you go back into Egypt, see that you do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in your hand, but I will harden his heart and he will not let the people go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_22">22&#160;</span>You shall tell Pharaoh, ‘Yahweh says, Israel is my son, my firstborn, 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_23">23&#160;</span>and I have said to you, “Let my son go, that he may serve me;” and you have refused to let him go. Behold, I will kill your firstborn son.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_24">24&#160;</span>On the way at a lodging place, Yahweh met Moses and wanted to kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_25">25&#160;</span>Then Zipporah took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet; and she said, “Surely you are a bridegroom of blood to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_26">26&#160;</span>So he let him alone. Then she said, “You are a bridegroom of blood,” because of the circumcision. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX4_27">27&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Aaron, “Go into the wilderness to meet Moses.” </div>
<div class='p'>He went, and met him on God’s mountain, and kissed him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_28">28&#160;</span>Moses told Aaron all Yahweh’s words with which he had sent him, and all the signs with which he had instructed him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_29">29&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_30">30&#160;</span>Aaron spoke all the words which Yahweh had spoken to Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="EX4_31">31&#160;</span>The people believed, and when they heard that Yahweh had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshiped.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_1">1&#160;</span>Afterward Moses and Aaron came, and said to Pharaoh, “This is what Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘Let my people go, that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_2">2&#160;</span>Pharaoh said, “Who is Yahweh, that I should listen to his voice to let Israel go? I don’t know Yahweh, and moreover I will not let Israel go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_3">3&#160;</span>They said, “The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Please let us go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Yahweh, our God, lest he fall on us with pestilence, or with the sword.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_4">4&#160;</span>The king of Egypt said to them, “Why do you, Moses and Aaron, take the people from their work? Get back to your burdens!” 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_5">5&#160;</span>Pharaoh said, “Behold, the people of the land are now many, and you make them rest from their burdens.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_6">6&#160;</span>The same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people and their officers, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_7">7&#160;</span>“You shall no longer give the people straw to make brick, as before. Let them go and gather straw for themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_8">8&#160;</span>You shall require from them the number of the bricks which they made before. You shall not diminish anything of it, for they are idle. Therefore they cry, saying, ‘Let’s go and sacrifice to our God.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_9">9&#160;</span>Let heavier work be laid on the men, that they may labor in it. Don’t let them pay any attention to lying words.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_10">10&#160;</span>The taskmasters of the people went out with their officers, and they spoke to the people, saying, “This is what Pharaoh says: ‘I will not give you straw. 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_11">11&#160;</span>Go yourselves, get straw where you can find it, for nothing of your work shall be diminished.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_12">12&#160;</span>So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw. 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_13">13&#160;</span>The taskmasters were urgent saying, “Fulfill your work quota daily, as when there was straw!” 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_14">14&#160;</span>The officers of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh’s taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and were asked, “Why haven’t you fulfilled your quota both yesterday and today, in making brick as before?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_15">15&#160;</span>Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, “Why do you deal this way with your servants? 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_16">16&#160;</span>No straw is given to your servants, and they tell us, ‘Make brick!’ and behold, your servants are beaten; but the fault is in your own people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_17">17&#160;</span>But Pharaoh said, “You are idle! You are idle! Therefore you say, ‘Let’s go and sacrifice to Yahweh.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_18">18&#160;</span>Go therefore now, and work; for no straw shall be given to you; yet you shall deliver the same number of bricks!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_19">19&#160;</span>The officers of the children of Israel saw that they were in trouble when it was said, “You shall not diminish anything from your daily quota of bricks!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_20">20&#160;</span>They met Moses and Aaron, who stood along the way, as they came out from Pharaoh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_21">21&#160;</span>They said to them, “May Yahweh look at you and judge, because you have made us a stench to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to kill us!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX5_22">22&#160;</span>Moses returned to Yahweh, and said, “Lord, why have you brought trouble on this people? Why is it that you have sent me? 
<span class="verse" id="EX5_23">23&#160;</span>For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in your name, he has brought trouble on this people. You have not rescued your people at all!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Now you shall see what I will do to Pharaoh, for by a strong hand he shall let them go, and by a strong hand he shall drive them out of his land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_2">2&#160;</span>God spoke to Moses, and said to him, “I am Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_3">3&#160;</span>I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as God Almighty; but by my name Yahweh I was not known to them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_4">4&#160;</span>I have also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their travels, in which they lived as aliens. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover I have heard the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have remembered my covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore tell the children of Israel, ‘I am Yahweh, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_7">7&#160;</span>I will take you to myself for a people. I will be your God; and you shall know that I am Yahweh your God, who brings you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_8">8&#160;</span>I will bring you into the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; and I will give it to you for a heritage: I am Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_9">9&#160;</span>Moses spoke so to the children of Israel, but they didn’t listen to Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_11">11&#160;</span>“Go in, speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_12">12&#160;</span>Moses spoke before Yahweh, saying, “Behold, the children of Israel haven’t listened to me. How then shall Pharaoh listen to me, when I have uncircumcised lips?” 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, and gave them a command to the children of Israel, and to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_14">14&#160;</span>These are the heads of their fathers’ houses. The sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel: Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi; these are the families of Reuben. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_15">15&#160;</span>The sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman; these are the families of Simeon. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_16">16&#160;</span>These are the names of the sons of Levi according to their generations: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari; and the years of the life of Levi were one hundred thirty-seven years. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_17">17&#160;</span>The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, according to their families. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_18">18&#160;</span>The sons of Kohath: Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel; and the years of the life of Kohath were one hundred thirty-three years. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_19">19&#160;</span>The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their generations. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_20">20&#160;</span>Amram took Jochebed his father’s sister to himself as wife; and she bore him Aaron and Moses. The years of the life of Amram were one hundred thirty-seven years. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_21">21&#160;</span>The sons of Izhar: Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_22">22&#160;</span>The sons of Uzziel: Mishael, Elzaphan, and Sithri. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_23">23&#160;</span>Aaron took Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, as his wife; and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_24">24&#160;</span>The sons of Korah: Assir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph; these are the families of the Korahites. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_25">25&#160;</span>Eleazar Aaron’s son took one of the daughters of Putiel as his wife; and she bore him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers’ houses of the Levites according to their families. 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_26">26&#160;</span>These are that Aaron and Moses to whom Yahweh said, “Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_27">27&#160;</span>These are those who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_28">28&#160;</span>On the day when Yahweh spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="EX6_29">29&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “I am Yahweh. Tell Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX6_30">30&#160;</span>Moses said before Yahweh, “Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh listen to me?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Behold, I have made you as God to Pharaoh; and Aaron your brother shall be your prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_2">2&#160;</span>You shall speak all that I command you; and Aaron your brother shall speak to Pharaoh, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_3">3&#160;</span>I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_4">4&#160;</span>But Pharaoh will not listen to you, so I will lay my hand on Egypt, and bring out my armies, my people the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_5">5&#160;</span>The Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh when I stretch out my hand on Egypt, and bring the children of Israel out from among them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_6">6&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron did so. As Yahweh commanded them, so they did. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_7">7&#160;</span>Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_9">9&#160;</span>“When Pharaoh speaks to you, saying, ‘Perform a miracle!’ then you shall tell Aaron, ‘Take your rod, and cast it down before Pharaoh, and it will become a serpent.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_10">10&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and they did so, as Yahweh had commanded. Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_11">11&#160;</span>Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men and the sorcerers. They also, the magicians of Egypt, did the same thing with their enchantments. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_12">12&#160;</span>For they each cast down their rods, and they became serpents; but Aaron’s rod swallowed up their rods. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_13">13&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he didn’t listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Pharaoh’s heart is stubborn. He refuses to let the people go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_15">15&#160;</span>Go to Pharaoh in the morning. Behold, he is going out to the water. You shall stand by the river’s bank to meet him. You shall take the rod which was turned to a serpent in your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_16">16&#160;</span>You shall tell him, ‘Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to you, saying, “Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness. Behold, until now you haven’t listened.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “In this you shall know that I am Yahweh. Behold: I will strike with the rod that is in my hand on the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_18">18&#160;</span>The fish that are in the river will die and the river will become foul. The Egyptians will loathe to drink water from the river.” ’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Take your rod, and stretch out your hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools, and over all their ponds of water, that they may become blood. There will be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX7_20">20&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron did so, as Yahweh commanded; and he lifted up the rod, and struck the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants; and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_21">21&#160;</span>The fish that were in the river died. The river became foul. The Egyptians couldn’t drink water from the river. The blood was throughout all the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_22">22&#160;</span>The magicians of Egypt did the same thing with their enchantments. So Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he didn’t listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_23">23&#160;</span>Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and he didn’t even take this to heart. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_24">24&#160;</span>All the Egyptians dug around the river for water to drink; for they couldn’t drink the river water. 
<span class="verse" id="EX7_25">25&#160;</span>Seven days were fulfilled, after Yahweh had struck the river.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh, and tell him, ‘This is what Yahweh says, “Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_2">2&#160;</span>If you refuse to let them go, behold, I will plague all your borders with frogs. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_3">3&#160;</span>The river will swarm with frogs, which will go up and come into your house, and into your bedroom, and on your bed, and into the house of your servants, and on your people, and into your ovens, and into your kneading troughs. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_4">4&#160;</span>The frogs shall come up both on you, and on your people, and on all your servants.” ’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Stretch out your hand with your rod over the rivers, over the streams, and over the pools, and cause frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_6">6&#160;</span>Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_7">7&#160;</span>The magicians did the same thing with their enchantments, and brought up frogs on the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_8">8&#160;</span>Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, “Entreat Yahweh, that he take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice to Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_9">9&#160;</span>Moses said to Pharaoh, “I give you the honor of setting the time that I should pray for you, and for your servants, and for your people, that the frogs be destroyed from you and your houses, and remain in the river only.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_10">10&#160;</span>Pharaoh said, “Tomorrow.” </div>
<div class='p'>Moses said, “Let it be according to your word, that you may know that there is no one like Yahweh our God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_11">11&#160;</span>The frogs shall depart from you, and from your houses, and from your servants, and from your people. They shall remain in the river only.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_12">12&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh, and Moses cried to Yahweh concerning the frogs which he had brought on Pharaoh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh did according to the word of Moses, and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_14">14&#160;</span>They gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_15">15&#160;</span>But when Pharaoh saw that there was a respite, he hardened his heart, and didn’t listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Tell Aaron, ‘Stretch out your rod, and strike the dust of the earth, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_17">17&#160;</span>They did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and struck the dust of the earth, and there were lice on man, and on animal; all the dust of the earth became lice throughout all the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_18">18&#160;</span>The magicians tried with their enchantments to produce lice, but they couldn’t. There were lice on man, and on animal. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_19">19&#160;</span>Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is God’s finger;” but Pharaoh’s heart was hardened, and he didn’t listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; behold, he comes out to the water; and tell him, ‘This is what Yahweh says, “Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_21">21&#160;</span>Else, if you will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies on you, and on your servants, and on your people, and into your houses. The houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground they are on. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_22">22&#160;</span>I will set apart in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, to the end you may know that I am Yahweh on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_23">23&#160;</span>I will put a division between my people and your people. This sign shall happen by tomorrow.” ’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh did so; and there came grievous swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants’ houses. In all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted by reason of the swarms of flies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_25">25&#160;</span>Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, “Go, sacrifice to your God in the land!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_26">26&#160;</span>Moses said, “It isn’t appropriate to do so; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Yahweh our God. Behold, if we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, won’t they stone us? 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_27">27&#160;</span>We will go three days’ journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Yahweh our God, as he shall command us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_28">28&#160;</span>Pharaoh said, “I will let you go, that you may sacrifice to Yahweh your God in the wilderness, only you shall not go very far away. Pray for me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX8_29">29&#160;</span>Moses said, “Behold, I am going out from you. I will pray to Yahweh that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow; only don’t let Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to Yahweh.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_30">30&#160;</span>Moses went out from Pharaoh, and prayed to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_31">31&#160;</span>Yahweh did according to the word of Moses, and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people. There remained not one. 
<span class="verse" id="EX8_32">32&#160;</span>Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he didn’t let the people go.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_1">1&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh, and tell him, ‘This is what Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, says: “Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_2">2&#160;</span>For if you refuse to let them go, and hold them still, 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_3">3&#160;</span>behold, Yahweh’s hand is on your livestock which are in the field, on the horses, on the donkeys, on the camels, on the herds, and on the flocks with a very grievous pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh will make a distinction between the livestock of Israel and the livestock of Egypt; and nothing shall die of all that belongs to the children of Israel.” ’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh appointed a set time, saying, “Tomorrow Yahweh shall do this thing in the land.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh did that thing on the next day; and all the livestock of Egypt died, but of the livestock of the children of Israel, not one died. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_7">7&#160;</span>Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of the livestock of the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn, and he didn’t let the people go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses and to Aaron, “Take handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward the sky in the sight of Pharaoh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_9">9&#160;</span>It shall become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall be boils and blisters breaking out on man and on animal, throughout all the land of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_10">10&#160;</span>They took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it up toward the sky; and it became boils and blisters breaking out on man and on animal. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_11">11&#160;</span>The magicians couldn’t stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boils were on the magicians and on all the Egyptians. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he didn’t listen to them, as Yahweh had spoken to Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and tell him, ‘This is what Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, says: “Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_14">14&#160;</span>For this time I will send all my plagues against your heart, against your officials, and against your people; that you may know that there is no one like me in all the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_15">15&#160;</span>For now I would have stretched out my hand, and struck you and your people with pestilence, and you would have been cut off from the earth; 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_16">16&#160;</span>but indeed for this cause I have made you stand: to show you my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth, 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_17">17&#160;</span>because you still exalt yourself against my people, that you won’t let them go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, tomorrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt since the day it was founded even until now. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_19">19&#160;</span>Now therefore command that all of your livestock and all that you have in the field be brought into shelter. The hail will come down on every man and animal that is found in the field, and isn’t brought home, and they will die.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_20">20&#160;</span>Those who feared Yahweh’s word among the servants of Pharaoh made their servants and their livestock flee into the houses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_21">21&#160;</span>Whoever didn’t respect Yahweh’s word left his servants and his livestock in the field. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward the sky, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, on man, and on animal, and on every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_23">23&#160;</span>Moses stretched out his rod toward the heavens, and Yahweh sent thunder and hail; and lightning flashed down to the earth. Yahweh rained hail on the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_24">24&#160;</span>So there was very severe hail, and lightning mixed with the hail, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_25">25&#160;</span>The hail struck throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and animal; and the hail struck every herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_26">26&#160;</span>Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, there was no hail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_27">27&#160;</span>Pharaoh sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and said to them, “I have sinned this time. Yahweh is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_28">28&#160;</span>Pray to Yahweh; for there has been enough of mighty thunderings and hail. I will let you go, and you shall stay no longer.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_29">29&#160;</span>Moses said to him, “As soon as I have gone out of the city, I will spread out my hands to Yahweh. The thunders shall cease, and there will not be any more hail; that you may know that the earth is Yahweh’s. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_30">30&#160;</span>But as for you and your servants, I know that you don’t yet fear Yahweh God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX9_31">31&#160;</span>The flax and the barley were struck, for the barley had ripened and the flax was blooming. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_32">32&#160;</span>But the wheat and the spelt were not struck, for they had not grown up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_33">33&#160;</span>Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread out his hands to Yahweh; and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_34">34&#160;</span>When Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders had ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants. 
<span class="verse" id="EX9_35">35&#160;</span>The heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he didn’t let the children of Israel go, just as Yahweh had spoken through Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Go in to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart and the heart of his servants, that I may show these my signs among them; 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_2">2&#160;</span>and that you may tell in the hearing of your son, and of your son’s son, what things I have done to Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; that you may know that I am Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_3">3&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and said to him, “This is what Yahweh, the God of the Hebrews, says: ‘How long will you refuse to humble yourself before me? Let my people go, that they may serve me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_4">4&#160;</span>Or else, if you refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I will bring locusts into your country, 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_5">5&#160;</span>and they shall cover the surface of the earth, so that one won’t be able to see the earth. They shall eat the residue of that which has escaped, which remains to you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which grows for you out of the field. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_6">6&#160;</span>Your houses shall be filled, and the houses of all your servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, as neither your fathers nor your fathers’ fathers have seen, since the day that they were on the earth to this day.’ ” He turned, and went out from Pharaoh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_7">7&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s servants said to him, “How long will this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, that they may serve Yahweh, their God. Don’t you yet know that Egypt is destroyed?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_8">8&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh, and he said to them, “Go, serve Yahweh your God; but who are those who will go?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_9">9&#160;</span>Moses said, “We will go with our young and with our old. We will go with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds; for we must hold a feast to Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_10">10&#160;</span>He said to them, “Yahweh be with you if I let you go with your little ones! See, evil is clearly before your faces. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_11">11&#160;</span>Not so! Go now you who are men, and serve Yahweh; for that is what you desire!” Then they were driven out from Pharaoh’s presence. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up on the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail has left.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_13">13&#160;</span>Moses stretched out his rod over the land of Egypt, and Yahweh brought an east wind on the land all that day, and all night; and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_14">14&#160;</span>The locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt. They were very grievous. Before them there were no such locusts as they, nor will there ever be again. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_15">15&#160;</span>For they covered the surface of the whole earth, so that the land was darkened, and they ate every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left. There remained nothing green, either tree or herb of the field, through all the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_16">16&#160;</span>Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and he said, “I have sinned against Yahweh your God, and against you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_17">17&#160;</span>Now therefore please forgive my sin again, and pray to Yahweh your God, that he may also take away from me this death.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_18">18&#160;</span>Moses went out from Pharaoh, and prayed to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh sent an exceedingly strong west wind, which took up the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea.<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> There remained not one locust in all the borders of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_20">20&#160;</span>But Yahweh hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he didn’t let the children of Israel go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand toward the sky, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_22">22&#160;</span>Moses stretched out his hand toward the sky, and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt for three days. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_23">23&#160;</span>They didn’t see one another, and nobody rose from his place for three days; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_24">24&#160;</span>Pharaoh called to Moses, and said, “Go, serve Yahweh. Only let your flocks and your herds stay behind. Let your little ones also go with you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_25">25&#160;</span>Moses said, “You must also give into our hand sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice to Yahweh our God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_26">26&#160;</span>Our livestock also shall go with us. Not a hoof shall be left behind, for of it we must take to serve Yahweh our God; and we don’t know with what we must serve Yahweh, until we come there.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_27">27&#160;</span>But Yahweh hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he wouldn’t let them go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX10_28">28&#160;</span>Pharaoh said to him, “Get away from me! Be careful to see my face no more; for in the day you see my face you shall die!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX10_29">29&#160;</span>Moses said, “You have spoken well. I will see your face again no more.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX11_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “I will bring yet one more plague on Pharaoh, and on Egypt; afterwards he will let you go. When he lets you go, he will surely thrust you out altogether. 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_2">2&#160;</span>Speak now in the ears of the people, and let every man ask of his neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover, the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh’s servants, and in the sight of the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX11_4">4&#160;</span>Moses said, “This is what Yahweh says: ‘About midnight I will go out into the middle of Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_5">5&#160;</span>and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits on his throne, even to the firstborn of the female servant who is behind the mill, and all the firstborn of livestock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_6">6&#160;</span>There will be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there has not been, nor will be any more. 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_7">7&#160;</span>But against any of the children of Israel a dog won’t even bark or move its tongue, against man or animal, that you may know that Yahweh makes a distinction between the Egyptians and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_8">8&#160;</span>All these servants of yours will come down to me, and bow down themselves to me, saying, “Get out, with all the people who follow you;” and after that I will go out.’ ” He went out from Pharaoh in hot anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX11_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Pharaoh won’t listen to you, that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX11_10">10&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh, but Yahweh hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he didn’t let the children of Israel go out of his land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_2">2&#160;</span>“This month shall be to you the beginning of months. It shall be the first month of the year to you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_3">3&#160;</span>Speak to all the congregation of Israel, saying, ‘On the tenth day of this month, they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers’ houses, a lamb for a household; 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_4">4&#160;</span>and if the household is too little for a lamb, then he and his neighbor next to his house shall take one according to the number of the souls. You shall make your count for the lamb according to what everyone can eat. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_5">5&#160;</span>Your lamb shall be without defect, a male a year old. You shall take it from the sheep or from the goats. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_6">6&#160;</span>You shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month; and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it at evening. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_7">7&#160;</span>They shall take some of the blood, and put it on the two door posts and on the lintel, on the houses in which they shall eat it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_8">8&#160;</span>They shall eat the meat in that night, roasted with fire, with unleavened bread. They shall eat it with bitter herbs. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t eat it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roasted with fire; with its head, its legs and its inner parts. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_10">10&#160;</span>You shall let nothing of it remain until the morning; but that which remains of it until the morning you shall burn with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_11">11&#160;</span>This is how you shall eat it: with your belt on your waist, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and you shall eat it in haste: it is Yahweh’s Passover. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_12">12&#160;</span>For I will go through the land of Egypt in that night, and will strike all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and animal. I will execute judgments against all the gods of Egypt. I am Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_13">13&#160;</span>The blood shall be to you for a token on the houses where you are. When I see the blood, I will pass over you, and no plague will be on you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_14">14&#160;</span>This day shall be a memorial for you. You shall keep it as a feast to Yahweh. You shall keep it as a feast throughout your generations by an ordinance forever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread; even the first day you shall put away yeast out of your houses, for whoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_16">16&#160;</span>In the first day there shall be to you a holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy convocation; no kind of work shall be done in them, except that which every man must eat, only that may be done by you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_17">17&#160;</span>You shall observe the feast of unleavened bread; for in this same day I have brought your armies out of the land of Egypt. Therefore you shall observe this day throughout your generations by an ordinance forever. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_18">18&#160;</span>In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, you shall eat unleavened bread, until the twenty first day of the month at evening. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_19">19&#160;</span>There shall be no yeast found in your houses for seven days, for whoever eats that which is leavened, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he is a foreigner, or one who is born in the land. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_20">20&#160;</span>You shall eat nothing leavened. In all your habitations you shall eat unleavened bread.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_21">21&#160;</span>Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said to them, “Draw out, and take lambs according to your families, and kill the Passover. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_22">22&#160;</span>You shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two door posts with the blood that is in the basin. None of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_23">23&#160;</span>For Yahweh will pass through to strike the Egyptians; and when he sees the blood on the lintel, and on the two door posts, Yahweh will pass over the door, and will not allow the destroyer to come in to your houses to strike you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_24">24&#160;</span>You shall observe this thing for an ordinance to you and to your sons forever. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_25">25&#160;</span>It shall happen when you have come to the land which Yahweh will give you, as he has promised, that you shall keep this service. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_26">26&#160;</span>It will happen, when your children ask you, ‘What do you mean by this service?’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_27">27&#160;</span>that you shall say, ‘It is the sacrifice of Yahweh’s Passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when he struck the Egyptians, and spared our houses.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>The people bowed their heads and worshiped. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_28">28&#160;</span>The children of Israel went and did so; as Yahweh had commanded Moses and Aaron, so they did. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_29">29&#160;</span>At midnight, Yahweh struck all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of livestock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_30">30&#160;</span>Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_31">31&#160;</span>He called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, “Rise up, get out from among my people, both you and the children of Israel; and go, serve Yahweh, as you have said! 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_32">32&#160;</span>Take both your flocks and your herds, as you have said, and be gone; and bless me also!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_33">33&#160;</span>The Egyptians were urgent with the people, to send them out of the land in haste, for they said, “We are all dead men.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_34">34&#160;</span>The people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading troughs being bound up in their clothes on their shoulders. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_35">35&#160;</span>The children of Israel did according to the word of Moses; and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and clothing. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_36">36&#160;</span>Yahweh gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. They plundered the Egyptians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_37">37&#160;</span>The children of Israel traveled from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot who were men, in addition to children. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_38">38&#160;</span>A mixed multitude went up also with them, with flocks, herds, and even very much livestock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_39">39&#160;</span>They baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought out of Egypt; for it wasn’t leavened, because they were thrust out of Egypt, and couldn’t wait, and they had not prepared any food for themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_40">40&#160;</span>Now the time that the children of Israel lived in Egypt was four hundred thirty years. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_41">41&#160;</span>At the end of four hundred thirty years, to the day, all of Yahweh’s armies went out from the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_42">42&#160;</span>It is a night to be much observed to Yahweh for bringing them out from the land of Egypt. This is that night of Yahweh, to be much observed by all the children of Israel throughout their generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX12_43">43&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses and Aaron, “This is the ordinance of the Passover. No foreigner shall eat of it, 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_44">44&#160;</span>but every man’s servant who is bought for money, when you have circumcised him, then shall he eat of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_45">45&#160;</span>A foreigner and a hired servant shall not eat of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_46">46&#160;</span>It must be eaten in one house. You shall not carry any of the meat outside of the house. Do not break any of its bones. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_47">47&#160;</span>All the congregation of Israel shall keep it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_48">48&#160;</span>When a stranger lives as a foreigner with you, and would like to keep the Passover to Yahweh, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it. He shall be as one who is born in the land; but no uncircumcised person shall eat of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_49">49&#160;</span>One law shall be to him who is born at home, and to the stranger who lives as a foreigner among you.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_50">50&#160;</span>All the children of Israel did so. As Yahweh commanded Moses and Aaron, so they did. 
<span class="verse" id="EX12_51">51&#160;</span>That same day, Yahweh brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_2">2&#160;</span>“Sanctify to me all the firstborn, whatever opens the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and of animal. It is mine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_3">3&#160;</span>Moses said to the people, “Remember this day, in which you came out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for by strength of hand Yahweh brought you out from this place. No leavened bread shall be eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_4">4&#160;</span>Today you go out in the month Abib. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_5">5&#160;</span>It shall be, when Yahweh brings you into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which he swore to your fathers to give you, a land flowing with milk and honey, that you shall keep this service in this month. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_6">6&#160;</span>Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_7">7&#160;</span>Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days; and no leavened bread shall be seen with you. No yeast shall be seen with you, within all your borders. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_8">8&#160;</span>You shall tell your son in that day, saying, ‘It is because of that which Yahweh did for me when I came out of Egypt.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_9">9&#160;</span>It shall be for a sign to you on your hand, and for a memorial between your eyes, that Yahweh’s law may be in your mouth; for with a strong hand Yahweh has brought you out of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_10">10&#160;</span>You shall therefore keep this ordinance in its season from year to year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_11">11&#160;</span>“It shall be, when Yahweh brings you into the land of the Canaanite, as he swore to you and to your fathers, and will give it you, 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_12">12&#160;</span>that you shall set apart to Yahweh all that opens the womb, and every firstborn that comes from an animal which you have. The males shall be Yahweh’s. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_13">13&#160;</span>Every firstborn of a donkey you shall redeem with a lamb; and if you will not redeem it, then you shall break its neck; and you shall redeem all the firstborn of man among your sons. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_14">14&#160;</span>It shall be, when your son asks you in time to come, saying, ‘What is this?’ that you shall tell him, ‘By strength of hand Yahweh brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_15">15&#160;</span>When Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, Yahweh killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of livestock. Therefore I sacrifice to Yahweh all that opens the womb, being males; but all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_16">16&#160;</span>It shall be for a sign on your hand, and for symbols between your eyes; for by strength of hand Yahweh brought us out of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX13_17">17&#160;</span>When Pharaoh had let the people go, God didn’t lead them by the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, “Lest perhaps the people change their minds when they see war, and they return to Egypt”; 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_18">18&#160;</span>but God led the people around by the way of the wilderness by the Red Sea; and the children of Israel went up armed out of the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_19">19&#160;</span>Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had made the children of Israel swear, saying, “God will surely visit you, and you shall carry up my bones away from here with you.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_20">20&#160;</span>They took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them on their way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light, that they might go by day and by night: 
<span class="verse" id="EX13_22">22&#160;</span>the pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night, didn’t depart from before the people.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal Zephon. You shall encamp opposite it by the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_3">3&#160;</span>Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, ‘They are entangled in the land. The wilderness has shut them in.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_4">4&#160;</span>I will harden Pharaoh’s heart, and he will follow after them; and I will get honor over Pharaoh, and over all his armies; and the Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh.” They did so. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_5">5&#160;</span>The king of Egypt was told that the people had fled; and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was changed toward the people, and they said, “What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?” 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_6">6&#160;</span>He prepared his chariot, and took his army with him; 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_7">7&#160;</span>and he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, with captains over all of them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued the children of Israel; for the children of Israel went out with a high hand.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_9">9&#160;</span>The Egyptians pursued them. All the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, his horsemen, and his army overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baal Zephon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_10">10&#160;</span>When Pharaoh came near, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them; and they were very afraid. The children of Israel cried out to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_11">11&#160;</span>They said to Moses, “Because there were no graves in Egypt, have you taken us away to die in the wilderness? Why have you treated us this way, to bring us out of Egypt? 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_12">12&#160;</span>Isn’t this the word that we spoke to you in Egypt, saying, ‘Leave us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians?’ For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_13">13&#160;</span>Moses said to the people, “Don’t be afraid. Stand still, and see the salvation of Yahweh, which he will work for you today; for you will never again see the Egyptians whom you have seen today. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh will fight for you, and you shall be still.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Why do you cry to me? Speak to the children of Israel, that they go forward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_16">16&#160;</span>Lift up your rod, and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it. Then the children of Israel shall go into the middle of the sea on dry ground. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, I myself will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they will go in after them. I will get myself honor over Pharaoh, and over all his armies, over his chariots, and over his horsemen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_18">18&#160;</span>The Egyptians shall know that I am Yahweh when I have gotten myself honor over Pharaoh, over his chariots, and over his horsemen.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_19">19&#160;</span>The angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them; and the pillar of cloud moved from before them, and stood behind them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_20">20&#160;</span>It came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. There was the cloud and the darkness, yet it gave light by night. One didn’t come near the other all night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_21">21&#160;</span>Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and Yahweh caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_22">22&#160;</span>The children of Israel went into the middle of the sea on the dry ground; and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their left. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_23">23&#160;</span>The Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the middle of the sea: all of Pharaoh’s horses, his chariots, and his horsemen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_24">24&#160;</span>In the morning watch, Yahweh looked out on the Egyptian army through the pillar of fire and of cloud, and confused the Egyptian army. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_25">25&#160;</span>He took off their chariot wheels, and they drove them heavily; so that the Egyptians said, “Let’s flee from the face of Israel, for Yahweh fights for them against the Egyptians!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX14_26">26&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, that the waters may come again on the Egyptians, on their chariots, and on their horsemen.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_27">27&#160;</span>Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared; and the Egyptians fled against it. Yahweh overthrew the Egyptians in the middle of the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_28">28&#160;</span>The waters returned, and covered the chariots and the horsemen, even all Pharaoh’s army that went in after them into the sea. There remained not so much as one of them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_29">29&#160;</span>But the children of Israel walked on dry land in the middle of the sea, and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their left. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_30">30&#160;</span>Thus Yahweh saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. 
<span class="verse" id="EX14_31">31&#160;</span>Israel saw the great work which Yahweh did to the Egyptians, and the people feared Yahweh; and they believed in Yahweh and in his servant Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_1">1&#160;</span>Then Moses and the children of Israel sang this song to Yahweh, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>“I will sing to Yahweh, for he has triumphed gloriously. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has thrown the horse and his rider into the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_2">2&#160;</span>Yah is my strength and song. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has become my salvation. </div>
<div class='q'>This is my God, and I will praise him; </div>
<div class='q2'>my father’s God, and I will exalt him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh is a man of war. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh is his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_4">4&#160;</span>He has cast Pharaoh’s chariots and his army into the sea. </div>
<div class='q2'>His chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_5">5&#160;</span>The deeps cover them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They went down into the depths like a stone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_6">6&#160;</span>Your right hand, Yahweh, is glorious in power. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your right hand, Yahweh, dashes the enemy in pieces. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_7">7&#160;</span>In the greatness of your excellency, you overthrow those who rise up against you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You send out your wrath. It consumes them as stubble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_8">8&#160;</span>With the blast of your nostrils, the waters were piled up. </div>
<div class='q2'>The floods stood upright as a heap. </div>
<div class='q2'>The deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_9">9&#160;</span>The enemy said, ‘I will pursue. I will overtake. I will divide the plunder. </div>
<div class='q2'>My desire will be satisfied on them. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will draw my sword. My hand will destroy them.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_10">10&#160;</span>You blew with your wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sea covered them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They sank like lead in the mighty waters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_11">11&#160;</span>Who is like you, Yahweh, among the gods? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is like you, glorious in holiness, </div>
<div class='q2'>fearful in praises, doing wonders? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_12">12&#160;</span>You stretched out your right hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>The earth swallowed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_13">13&#160;</span>“You, in your loving kindness, have led the people that you have redeemed. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have guided them in your strength to your holy habitation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_14">14&#160;</span>The peoples have heard. </div>
<div class='q2'>They tremble. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pangs have taken hold of the inhabitants of Philistia. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_15">15&#160;</span>Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Trembling takes hold of the mighty men of Moab. </div>
<div class='q2'>All the inhabitants of Canaan have melted away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_16">16&#160;</span>Terror and dread falls on them. </div>
<div class='q2'>By the greatness of your arm they are as still as a stone, </div>
<div class='q2'>until your people pass over, Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>until the people you have purchased pass over. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_17">17&#160;</span>You will bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of your inheritance, </div>
<div class='q2'>the place, Yahweh, which you have made for yourself to dwell in: </div>
<div class='q2'>the sanctuary, Lord, which your hands have established. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_18">18&#160;</span>Yahweh will reign forever and ever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_19">19&#160;</span>For the horses of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and Yahweh brought back the waters of the sea on them; but the children of Israel walked on dry land in the middle of the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_20">20&#160;</span>Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a tambourine in her hand; and all the women went out after her with tambourines and with dances. 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_21">21&#160;</span>Miriam answered them, </div>
<div class='q'>“Sing to Yahweh, for he has triumphed gloriously. </div>
<div class='q'>He has thrown the horse and his rider into the sea.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_22">22&#160;</span>Moses led Israel onward from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water. 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_23">23&#160;</span>When they came to Marah, they couldn’t drink from the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. Therefore its name was called Marah.<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_24">24&#160;</span>The people murmured against Moses, saying, “What shall we drink?” 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_25">25&#160;</span>Then he cried to Yahweh. Yahweh showed him a tree, and he threw it into the waters, and the waters were made sweet. There he made a statute and an ordinance for them, and there he tested them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX15_26">26&#160;</span>He said, “If you will diligently listen to Yahweh your God’s voice, and will do that which is right in his eyes, and will pay attention to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the diseases on you which I have put on the Egyptians; for I am Yahweh who heals you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX15_27">27&#160;</span>They came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees. They encamped there by the waters.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_1">1&#160;</span>They took their journey from Elim, and all the congregation of the children of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_2">2&#160;</span>The whole congregation of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness; 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_3">3&#160;</span>and the children of Israel said to them, “We wish that we had died by Yahweh’s hand in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the meat pots, when we ate our fill of bread, for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_4">4&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to Moses, “Behold, I will rain bread from the sky for you, and the people shall go out and gather a day’s portion every day, that I may test them, whether they will walk in my law or not. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_5">5&#160;</span>It shall come to pass on the sixth day, that they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_6">6&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron said to all the children of Israel, “At evening, you shall know that Yahweh has brought you out from the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_7">7&#160;</span>In the morning, you shall see Yahweh’s glory; because he hears your murmurings against Yahweh. Who are we, that you murmur against us?” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_8">8&#160;</span>Moses said, “Now Yahweh will give you meat to eat in the evening, and in the morning bread to satisfy you, because Yahweh hears your murmurings which you murmur against him. And who are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against Yahweh.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_9">9&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron, “Tell all the congregation of the children of Israel, ‘Come close to Yahweh, for he has heard your murmurings.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_10">10&#160;</span>As Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the children of Israel, they looked toward the wilderness, and behold, Yahweh’s glory appeared in the cloud. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_12">12&#160;</span>“I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel. Speak to them, saying, ‘At evening you shall eat meat, and in the morning you shall be filled with bread. Then you will know that I am Yahweh your God.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_13">13&#160;</span>In the evening, quail came up and covered the camp; and in the morning the dew lay around the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_14">14&#160;</span>When the dew that lay had gone, behold, on the surface of the wilderness was a small round thing, small as the frost on the ground. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_15">15&#160;</span>When the children of Israel saw it, they said to one another, “What is it?” For they didn’t know what it was. Moses said to them, “It is the bread which Yahweh has given you to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_16">16&#160;</span>This is the thing which Yahweh has commanded: ‘Gather of it everyone according to his eating; an omer<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> a head, according to the number of your persons, you shall take it, every man for those who are in his tent.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_17">17&#160;</span>The children of Israel did so, and some gathered more, some less. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_18">18&#160;</span>When they measured it with an omer, he who gathered much had nothing over, and he who gathered little had no lack. They each gathered according to his eating. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_19">19&#160;</span>Moses said to them, “Let no one leave of it until the morning.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_20">20&#160;</span>Notwithstanding they didn’t listen to Moses, but some of them left of it until the morning, so it bred worms and became foul; and Moses was angry with them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_21">21&#160;</span>They gathered it morning by morning, everyone according to his eating. When the sun grew hot, it melted. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_22">22&#160;</span>On the sixth day, they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one; and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_23">23&#160;</span>He said to them, “This is that which Yahweh has spoken, ‘Tomorrow is a solemn rest, a holy Sabbath to Yahweh. Bake that which you want to bake, and boil that which you want to boil; and all that remains over lay up for yourselves to be kept until the morning.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_24">24&#160;</span>They laid it up until the morning, as Moses ordered, and it didn’t become foul, and there were no worms in it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_25">25&#160;</span>Moses said, “Eat that today, for today is a Sabbath to Yahweh. Today you shall not find it in the field. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_26">26&#160;</span>Six days you shall gather it, but on the seventh day is the Sabbath. In it there shall be none.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_27">27&#160;</span>On the seventh day, some of the people went out to gather, and they found none. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_28">28&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “How long do you refuse to keep my commandments and my laws? 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_29">29&#160;</span>Behold, because Yahweh has given you the Sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two days. Everyone stay in his place. Let no one go out of his place on the seventh day.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_30">30&#160;</span>So the people rested on the seventh day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX16_31">31&#160;</span>The house of Israel called its name “Manna”,<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and it was like coriander seed, white; and its taste was like wafers with honey. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_32">32&#160;</span>Moses said, “This is the thing which Yahweh has commanded, ‘Let an omer-full of it be kept throughout your generations, that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_33">33&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron, “Take a pot, and put an omer-full of manna in it, and lay it up before Yahweh, to be kept throughout your generations.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_34">34&#160;</span>As Yahweh commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_35">35&#160;</span>The children of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came to an inhabited land. They ate the manna until they came to the borders of the land of Canaan. 
<span class="verse" id="EX16_36">36&#160;</span>Now an omer is one tenth of an ephah.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_1">1&#160;</span>All the congregation of the children of Israel traveled from the wilderness of Sin, starting according to Yahweh’s commandment, and encamped in Rephidim; but there was no water for the people to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore the people quarreled with Moses, and said, “Give us water to drink.” </div>
<div class='p'>Moses said to them, “Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you test Yahweh?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_3">3&#160;</span>The people were thirsty for water there; so the people murmured against Moses, and said, “Why have you brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us, our children, and our livestock with thirst?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_4">4&#160;</span>Moses cried to Yahweh, saying, “What shall I do with these people? They are almost ready to stone me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Walk on before the people, and take the elders of Israel with you, and take the rod in your hand with which you struck the Nile, and go. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_6">6&#160;</span>Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock in Horeb. You shall strike the rock, and water will come out of it, that the people may drink.” Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_7">7&#160;</span>He called the name of the place Massah,<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and Meribah,<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> because the children of Israel quarreled, and because they tested Yahweh, saying, “Is Yahweh among us, or not?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX17_8">8&#160;</span>Then Amalek came and fought with Israel in Rephidim. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_9">9&#160;</span>Moses said to Joshua, “Choose men for us, and go out to fight with Amalek. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with God’s rod in my hand.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_10">10&#160;</span>So Joshua did as Moses had told him, and fought with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_11">11&#160;</span>When Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed. When he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_12">12&#160;</span>But Moses’ hands were heavy; so they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat on it. Aaron and Hur held up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side. His hands were steady until sunset. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_13">13&#160;</span>Joshua defeated Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: that I will utterly blot out the memory of Amalek from under the sky.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_15">15&#160;</span>Moses built an altar, and called its name “Yahweh our Banner”.<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="EX17_16">16&#160;</span>He said, “Yah has sworn: ‘Yahweh will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_1">1&#160;</span>Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses and for Israel his people, how Yahweh had brought Israel out of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_2">2&#160;</span>Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, received Zipporah, Moses’ wife, after he had sent her away, 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_3">3&#160;</span>and her two sons. The name of one son was Gershom,<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> for Moses said, “I have lived as a foreigner in a foreign land”. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_4">4&#160;</span>The name of the other was Eliezer,<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> for he said, “My father’s God was my help and delivered me from Pharaoh’s sword.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_5">5&#160;</span>Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, came with Moses’ sons and his wife to Moses into the wilderness where he was encamped, at the Mountain of God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_6">6&#160;</span>He said to Moses, “I, your father-in-law Jethro, have come to you with your wife, and her two sons with her.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_7">7&#160;</span>Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and bowed and kissed him. They asked each other of their welfare, and they came into the tent. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_8">8&#160;</span>Moses told his father-in-law all that Yahweh had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel’s sake, all the hardships that had come on them on the way, and how Yahweh delivered them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_9">9&#160;</span>Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which Yahweh had done to Israel, in that he had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_10">10&#160;</span>Jethro said, “Blessed be Yahweh, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh; who has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_11">11&#160;</span>Now I know that Yahweh is greater than all gods because of the way that they treated people arrogantly.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_12">12&#160;</span>Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God. Aaron came with all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses’ father-in-law before God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_13">13&#160;</span>On the next day, Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood around Moses from the morning to the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_14">14&#160;</span>When Moses’ father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, “What is this thing that you do for the people? Why do you sit alone, and all the people stand around you from morning to evening?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_15">15&#160;</span>Moses said to his father-in-law, “Because the people come to me to inquire of God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_16">16&#160;</span>When they have a matter, they come to me, and I judge between a man and his neighbor, and I make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_17">17&#160;</span>Moses’ father-in-law said to him, “The thing that you do is not good. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_18">18&#160;</span>You will surely wear away, both you, and this people that is with you; for the thing is too heavy for you. You are not able to perform it yourself alone. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_19">19&#160;</span>Listen now to my voice. I will give you counsel, and God be with you. You represent the people before God, and bring the causes to God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_20">20&#160;</span>You shall teach them the statutes and the laws, and shall show them the way in which they must walk, and the work that they must do. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_21">21&#160;</span>Moreover you shall provide out of all the people able men which fear God: men of truth, hating unjust gain; and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_22">22&#160;</span>Let them judge the people at all times. It shall be that every great matter they shall bring to you, but every small matter they shall judge themselves. So shall it be easier for you, and they shall share the load with you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_23">23&#160;</span>If you will do this thing, and God commands you so, then you will be able to endure, and all these people also will go to their place in peace.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX18_24">24&#160;</span>So Moses listened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_25">25&#160;</span>Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_26">26&#160;</span>They judged the people at all times. They brought the hard cases to Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="EX18_27">27&#160;</span>Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went his way into his own land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_1">1&#160;</span>In the third month after the children of Israel had gone out of the land of Egypt, on that same day they came into the wilderness of Sinai. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_2">2&#160;</span>When they had departed from Rephidim, and had come to the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped in the wilderness; and there Israel encamped before the mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_3">3&#160;</span>Moses went up to God, and Yahweh called to him out of the mountain, saying, “This is what you shall tell the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_4">4&#160;</span>‘You have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles’ wings, and brought you to myself. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_5">5&#160;</span>Now therefore, if you will indeed obey my voice and keep my covenant, then you shall be my own possession from among all peoples; for all the earth is mine; 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_6">6&#160;</span>and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.’ These are the words which you shall speak to the children of Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_7">7&#160;</span>Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and set before them all these words which Yahweh commanded him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_8">8&#160;</span>All the people answered together, and said, “All that Yahweh has spoken we will do.” </div>
<div class='p'>Moses reported the words of the people to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Behold, I come to you in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with you, and may also believe you forever.” Moses told the words of the people to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Go to the people, and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their garments, 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_11">11&#160;</span>and be ready for the third day; for on the third day Yahweh will come down in the sight of all the people on Mount Sinai. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_12">12&#160;</span>You shall set bounds to the people all around, saying, ‘Be careful that you don’t go up onto the mountain, or touch its border. Whoever touches the mountain shall be surely put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_13">13&#160;</span>No hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned or shot through; whether it is animal or man, he shall not live.’ When the trumpet sounds long, they shall come up to the mountain.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_14">14&#160;</span>Moses went down from the mountain to the people, and sanctified the people; and they washed their clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_15">15&#160;</span>He said to the people, “Be ready by the third day. Don’t have sexual relations with a woman.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_16">16&#160;</span>On the third day, when it was morning, there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud on the mountain, and the sound of an exceedingly loud trumpet; and all the people who were in the camp trembled. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_17">17&#160;</span>Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God; and they stood at the lower part of the mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_18">18&#160;</span>All of Mount Sinai smoked, because Yahweh descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended like the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mountain quaked greatly. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_19">19&#160;</span>When the sound of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh came down on Mount Sinai, to the top of the mountain. Yahweh called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Go down, warn the people, lest they break through to Yahweh to gaze, and many of them perish. 
<span class="verse" id="EX19_22">22&#160;</span>Let the priests also, who come near to Yahweh, sanctify themselves, lest Yahweh break out on them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_23">23&#160;</span>Moses said to Yahweh, “The people can’t come up to Mount Sinai, for you warned us, saying, ‘Set bounds around the mountain, and sanctify it.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh said to him, “Go down! You shall bring Aaron up with you, but don’t let the priests and the people break through to come up to Yahweh, lest he break out against them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX19_25">25&#160;</span>So Moses went down to the people, and told them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_1">1&#160;</span>God<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> spoke all these words, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_2">2&#160;</span>“I am Yahweh your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_3">3&#160;</span>“You shall have no other gods before me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_4">4&#160;</span>“You shall not make for yourselves an idol, nor any image of anything that is in the heavens above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth: 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_5">5&#160;</span>you shall not bow yourself down to them, nor serve them, for I, Yahweh your God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children, on the third and on the fourth generation of those who hate me, 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_6">6&#160;</span>and showing loving kindness to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_7">7&#160;</span>“You shall not misuse the name of Yahweh your God,<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> for Yahweh will not hold him guiltless who misuses his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_8">8&#160;</span>“Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_9">9&#160;</span>You shall labor six days, and do all your work, 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_10">10&#160;</span>but the seventh day is a Sabbath to Yahweh your God. You shall not do any work in it, you, nor your son, nor your daughter, your male servant, nor your female servant, nor your livestock, nor your stranger who is within your gates; 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_11">11&#160;</span>for in six days Yahweh made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day; therefore Yahweh blessed the Sabbath day, and made it holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_12">12&#160;</span>“Honor your father and your mother, that your days may be long in the land which Yahweh your God gives you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_13">13&#160;</span>“You shall not murder. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_14">14&#160;</span>“You shall not commit adultery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_15">15&#160;</span>“You shall not steal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_16">16&#160;</span>“You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_17">17&#160;</span>“You shall not covet your neighbor’s house. You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife, nor his male servant, nor his female servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor anything that is your neighbor’s.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_18">18&#160;</span>All the people perceived the thunderings, the lightnings, the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking. When the people saw it, they trembled, and stayed at a distance. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_19">19&#160;</span>They said to Moses, “Speak with us yourself, and we will listen; but don’t let God speak with us, lest we die.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_20">20&#160;</span>Moses said to the people, “Don’t be afraid, for God has come to test you, and that his fear may be before you, that you won’t sin.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_21">21&#160;</span>The people stayed at a distance, and Moses came near to the thick darkness where God was. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX20_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “This is what you shall tell the children of Israel: ‘You yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_23">23&#160;</span>You shall most certainly not make gods of silver or gods of gold for yourselves to be alongside me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_24">24&#160;</span>You shall make an altar of earth for me, and shall sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your peace offerings, your sheep and your cattle. In every place where I record my name I will come to you and I will bless you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_25">25&#160;</span>If you make me an altar of stone, you shall not build it of cut stones; for if you lift up your tool on it, you have polluted it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX20_26">26&#160;</span>You shall not go up by steps to my altar, that your nakedness may not be exposed to it.’  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_1">1&#160;</span>“Now these are the ordinances which you shall set before them: </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_2">2&#160;</span>“If you buy a Hebrew servant, he shall serve six years, and in the seventh he shall go out free without paying anything. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_3">3&#160;</span>If he comes in by himself, he shall go out by himself. If he is married, then his wife shall go out with him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_4">4&#160;</span>If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her master’s, and he shall go out by himself. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_5">5&#160;</span>But if the servant shall plainly say, ‘I love my master, my wife, and my children. I will not go out free;’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_6">6&#160;</span>then his master shall bring him to God, and shall bring him to the door or to the doorpost, and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him forever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_7">7&#160;</span>“If a man sells his daughter to be a female servant, she shall not go out as the male servants do. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_8">8&#160;</span>If she doesn’t please her master, who has married her to himself, then he shall let her be redeemed. He shall have no right to sell her to a foreign people, since he has dealt deceitfully with her. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_9">9&#160;</span>If he marries her to his son, he shall deal with her as a daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_10">10&#160;</span>If he takes another wife to himself, he shall not diminish her food, her clothing, and her marital rights. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_11">11&#160;</span>If he doesn’t do these three things for her, she may go free without paying any money. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_12">12&#160;</span>“One who strikes a man so that he dies shall surely be put to death, 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_13">13&#160;</span>but not if it is unintentional, but God allows it to happen; then I will appoint you a place where he shall flee. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_14">14&#160;</span>If a man schemes and comes presumptuously on his neighbor to kill him, you shall take him from my altar, that he may die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_15">15&#160;</span>“Anyone who attacks his father or his mother shall be surely put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_16">16&#160;</span>“Anyone who kidnaps someone and sells him, or if he is found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_17">17&#160;</span>“Anyone who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_18">18&#160;</span>“If men quarrel and one strikes the other with a stone, or with his fist, and he doesn’t die, but is confined to bed; 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_19">19&#160;</span>if he rises again and walks around with his staff, then he who struck him shall be cleared; only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall provide for his healing until he is thoroughly healed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_20">20&#160;</span>“If a man strikes his servant or his maid with a rod, and he dies under his hand, the man shall surely be punished. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_21">21&#160;</span>Notwithstanding, if his servant gets up after a day or two, he shall not be punished, for the servant is his property. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_22">22&#160;</span>“If men fight and hurt a pregnant woman so that she gives birth prematurely, and yet no harm follows, he shall be surely fined as much as the woman’s husband demands and the judges allow. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_23">23&#160;</span>But if any harm follows, then you must take life for life, 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_24">24&#160;</span>eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_25">25&#160;</span>burning for burning, wound for wound, and bruise for bruise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_26">26&#160;</span>“If a man strikes his servant’s eye, or his maid’s eye, and destroys it, he shall let him go free for his eye’s sake. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_27">27&#160;</span>If he strikes out his male servant’s tooth, or his female servant’s tooth, he shall let the servant go free for his tooth’s sake. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_28">28&#160;</span>“If a bull gores a man or a woman to death, the bull shall surely be stoned, and its meat shall not be eaten; but the owner of the bull shall not be held responsible. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_29">29&#160;</span>But if the bull had a habit of goring in the past, and this has been testified to its owner, and he has not kept it in, but it has killed a man or a woman, the bull shall be stoned, and its owner shall also be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_30">30&#160;</span>If a ransom is imposed on him, then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatever is imposed. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_31">31&#160;</span>Whether it has gored a son or has gored a daughter, according to this judgment it shall be done to him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_32">32&#160;</span>If the bull gores a male servant or a female servant, thirty shekels<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver shall be given to their master, and the ox shall be stoned. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_33">33&#160;</span>“If a man opens a pit, or if a man digs a pit and doesn’t cover it, and a bull or a donkey falls into it, 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_34">34&#160;</span>the owner of the pit shall make it good. He shall give money to its owner, and the dead animal shall be his. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX21_35">35&#160;</span>“If one man’s bull injures another’s, so that it dies, then they shall sell the live bull, and divide its price; and they shall also divide the dead animal. 
<span class="verse" id="EX21_36">36&#160;</span>Or if it is known that the bull was in the habit of goring in the past, and its owner has not kept it in, he shall surely pay bull for bull, and the dead animal shall be his own.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_1">1&#160;</span>“If a man steals an ox or a sheep, and kills it or sells it, he shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_2">2&#160;</span>If the thief is found breaking in, and is struck so that he dies, there shall be no guilt of bloodshed for him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_3">3&#160;</span>If the sun has risen on him, he is guilty of bloodshed. He shall make restitution. If he has nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_4">4&#160;</span>If the stolen property is found in his hand alive, whether it is ox, donkey, or sheep, he shall pay double. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_5">5&#160;</span>“If a man causes a field or vineyard to be eaten by letting his animal loose, and it grazes in another man’s field, he shall make restitution from the best of his own field, and from the best of his own vineyard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_6">6&#160;</span>“If fire breaks out, and catches in thorns so that the shocks of grain, or the standing grain, or the field are consumed; he who kindled the fire shall surely make restitution. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_7">7&#160;</span>“If a man delivers to his neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it is stolen out of the man’s house, if the thief is found, he shall pay double. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_8">8&#160;</span>If the thief isn’t found, then the master of the house shall come near to God, to find out whether or not he has put his hand on his neighbor’s goods. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_9">9&#160;</span>For every matter of trespass, whether it is for ox, for donkey, for sheep, for clothing, or for any kind of lost thing, about which one says, ‘This is mine,’ the cause of both parties shall come before God. He whom God condemns shall pay double to his neighbor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_10">10&#160;</span>“If a man delivers to his neighbor a donkey, an ox, a sheep, or any animal to keep, and it dies or is injured, or driven away, no man seeing it; 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_11">11&#160;</span>the oath of Yahweh shall be between them both, he has not put his hand on his neighbor’s goods; and its owner shall accept it, and he shall not make restitution. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_12">12&#160;</span>But if it is stolen from him, the one who stole shall make restitution to its owner. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_13">13&#160;</span>If it is torn in pieces, let him bring it for evidence. He shall not make good that which was torn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_14">14&#160;</span>“If a man borrows anything of his neighbor’s, and it is injured, or dies, its owner not being with it, he shall surely make restitution. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_15">15&#160;</span>If its owner is with it, he shall not make it good. If it is a leased thing, it came for its lease. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_16">16&#160;</span>“If a man entices a virgin who isn’t pledged to be married, and lies with her, he shall surely pay a dowry for her to be his wife. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_17">17&#160;</span>If her father utterly refuses to give her to him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_18">18&#160;</span>“You shall not allow a sorceress to live. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_19">19&#160;</span>“Whoever has sex with an animal shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_20">20&#160;</span>“He who sacrifices to any god, except to Yahweh only, shall be utterly destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_21">21&#160;</span>“You shall not wrong an alien or oppress him, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_22">22&#160;</span>“You shall not take advantage of any widow or fatherless child. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_23">23&#160;</span>If you take advantage of them at all, and they cry at all to me, I will surely hear their cry; 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_24">24&#160;</span>and my wrath will grow hot, and I will kill you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_25">25&#160;</span>“If you lend money to any of my people with you who is poor, you shall not be to him as a creditor. You shall not charge him interest. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_26">26&#160;</span>If you take your neighbor’s garment as collateral, you shall restore it to him before the sun goes down, 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_27">27&#160;</span>for that is his only covering, it is his garment for his skin. What would he sleep in? It will happen, when he cries to me, that I will hear, for I am gracious. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_28">28&#160;</span>“You shall not blaspheme God, nor curse a ruler of your people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_29">29&#160;</span>“You shall not delay to offer from your harvest and from the outflow of your presses. </div>
<div class='p'>“You shall give the firstborn of your sons to me. 
<span class="verse" id="EX22_30">30&#160;</span>You shall do likewise with your cattle and with your sheep. It shall be with its mother seven days, then on the eighth day you shall give it to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX22_31">31&#160;</span>“You shall be holy men to me, therefore you shall not eat any meat that is torn by animals in the field. You shall cast it to the dogs.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_1">1&#160;</span>“You shall not spread a false report. Don’t join your hand with the wicked to be a malicious witness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_2">2&#160;</span>“You shall not follow a crowd to do evil. You shall not testify in court to side with a multitude to pervert justice. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_3">3&#160;</span>You shall not favor a poor man in his cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_4">4&#160;</span>“If you meet your enemy’s ox or his donkey going astray, you shall surely bring it back to him again. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_5">5&#160;</span>If you see the donkey of him who hates you fallen down under his burden, don’t leave him. You shall surely help him with it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_6">6&#160;</span>“You shall not deny justice to your poor people in their lawsuits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_7">7&#160;</span>“Keep far from a false charge, and don’t kill the innocent and righteous; for I will not justify the wicked. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_8">8&#160;</span>“You shall take no bribe, for a bribe blinds those who have sight and perverts the words of the righteous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_9">9&#160;</span>“You shall not oppress an alien, for you know the heart of an alien, since you were aliens in the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_10">10&#160;</span>“For six years you shall sow your land, and shall gather in its increase, 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_11">11&#160;</span>but the seventh year you shall let it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of your people may eat; and what they leave the animal of the field shall eat. In the same way, you shall deal with your vineyard and with your olive grove. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_12">12&#160;</span>“Six days you shall do your work, and on the seventh day you shall rest, that your ox and your donkey may have rest, and the son of your servant, and the alien may be refreshed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_13">13&#160;</span>“Be careful to do all things that I have said to you; and don’t invoke the name of other gods or even let them be heard out of your mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_14">14&#160;</span>“You shall observe a feast to me three times a year. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_15">15&#160;</span>You shall observe the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the time appointed in the month Abib (for in it you came out of Egypt), and no one shall appear before me empty. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_16">16&#160;</span>And the feast of harvest, the first fruits of your labors, which you sow in the field; and the feast of ingathering, at the end of the year, when you gather in your labors out of the field. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_17">17&#160;</span>Three times in the year all your males shall appear before the Lord Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_18">18&#160;</span>“You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread. The fat of my feast shall not remain all night until the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_19">19&#160;</span>You shall bring the first of the first fruits of your ground into the house of Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>“You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX23_20">20&#160;</span>“Behold, I send an angel before you, to keep you by the way, and to bring you into the place which I have prepared. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_21">21&#160;</span>Pay attention to him, and listen to his voice. Don’t provoke him, for he will not pardon your disobedience, for my name is in him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_22">22&#160;</span>But if you indeed listen to his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to your enemies, and an adversary to your adversaries. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_23">23&#160;</span>For my angel shall go before you, and bring you in to the Amorite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite; and I will cut them off. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_24">24&#160;</span>You shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor follow their practices, but you shall utterly overthrow them and demolish their pillars. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_25">25&#160;</span>You shall serve Yahweh your God, and he will bless your bread and your water, and I will take sickness away from among you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_26">26&#160;</span>No one will miscarry or be barren in your land. I will fulfill the number of your days. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_27">27&#160;</span>I will send my terror before you, and will confuse all the people to whom you come, and I will make all your enemies turn their backs to you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_28">28&#160;</span>I will send the hornet before you, which will drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_29">29&#160;</span>I will not drive them out from before you in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the animals of the field multiply against you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_30">30&#160;</span>Little by little I will drive them out from before you, until you have increased and inherit the land. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_31">31&#160;</span>I will set your border from the Red Sea even to the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness to the River; for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and you shall drive them out before you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_32">32&#160;</span>You shall make no covenant with them, nor with their gods. 
<span class="verse" id="EX23_33">33&#160;</span>They shall not dwell in your land, lest they make you sin against me, for if you serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to you.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_1">1&#160;</span>He said to Moses, “Come up to Yahweh, you, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship from a distance. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_2">2&#160;</span>Moses alone shall come near to Yahweh, but they shall not come near. The people shall not go up with him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_3">3&#160;</span>Moses came and told the people all Yahweh’s words, and all the ordinances; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, “All the words which Yahweh has spoken will we do.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_4">4&#160;</span>Moses wrote all Yahweh’s words, then rose up early in the morning and built an altar at the base of the mountain, with twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_5">5&#160;</span>He sent young men of the children of Israel, who offered burnt offerings and sacrificed peace offerings of cattle to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_6">6&#160;</span>Moses took half of the blood and put it in basins, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_7">7&#160;</span>He took the book of the covenant and read it in the hearing of the people, and they said, “We will do all that Yahweh has said, and be obedient.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_8">8&#160;</span>Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, “Look, this is the blood of the covenant, which Yahweh has made with you concerning all these words.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_9">9&#160;</span>Then Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_10">10&#160;</span>They saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was like a paved work of sapphire<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> stone, like the skies for clearness. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_11">11&#160;</span>He didn’t lay his hand on the nobles of the children of Israel. They saw God, and ate and drank. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Come up to me on the mountain, and stay here, and I will give you the stone tablets with the law and the commands that I have written, that you may teach them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_13">13&#160;</span>Moses rose up with Joshua, his servant, and Moses went up onto God’s Mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_14">14&#160;</span>He said to the elders, “Wait here for us, until we come again to you. Behold, Aaron and Hur are with you. Whoever is involved in a dispute can go to them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX24_15">15&#160;</span>Moses went up on the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh’s glory settled on Mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days. The seventh day he called to Moses out of the middle of the cloud. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_17">17&#160;</span>The appearance of Yahweh’s glory was like devouring fire on the top of the mountain in the eyes of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX24_18">18&#160;</span>Moses entered into the middle of the cloud, and went up on the mountain; and Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, that they take an offering for me. From everyone whose heart makes him willing you shall take my offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_3">3&#160;</span>This is the offering which you shall take from them: gold, silver, bronze, 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_4">4&#160;</span>blue, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goats’ hair, 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_5">5&#160;</span>rams’ skins dyed red, sea cow hides,<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> acacia wood, 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_6">6&#160;</span>oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet incense, 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_7">7&#160;</span>onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_8">8&#160;</span>Let them make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_9">9&#160;</span>According to all that I show you, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all of its furniture, even so you shall make it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_10">10&#160;</span>“They shall make an ark of acacia wood. Its length shall be two and a half cubits,<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> its width a cubit and a half, and a cubit and a half its height. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_11">11&#160;</span>You shall overlay it with pure gold. You shall overlay it inside and outside, and you shall make a gold molding around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_12">12&#160;</span>You shall cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in its four feet. Two rings shall be on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_13">13&#160;</span>You shall make poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_14">14&#160;</span>You shall put the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark to carry the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_15">15&#160;</span>The poles shall be in the rings of the ark. They shall not be taken from it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_16">16&#160;</span>You shall put the covenant which I shall give you into the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_17">17&#160;</span>You shall make a mercy seat of pure gold. Two and a half cubits shall be its length, and a cubit and a half its width. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_18">18&#160;</span>You shall make two cherubim of hammered gold. You shall make them at the two ends of the mercy seat. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_19">19&#160;</span>Make one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end. You shall make the cherubim on its two ends of one piece with the mercy seat. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_20">20&#160;</span>The cherubim shall spread out their wings upward, covering the mercy seat with their wings, with their faces toward one another. The faces of the cherubim shall be toward the mercy seat. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_21">21&#160;</span>You shall put the mercy seat on top of the ark, and in the ark you shall put the covenant that I will give you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_22">22&#160;</span>There I will meet with you, and I will tell you from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubim which are on the ark of the covenant, all that I command you for the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_23">23&#160;</span>“You shall make a table of acacia wood. Its length shall be two cubits, and its width a cubit, and its height one and a half cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_24">24&#160;</span>You shall overlay it with pure gold, and make a gold molding around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_25">25&#160;</span>You shall make a rim of a hand width around it. You shall make a golden molding on its rim around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_26">26&#160;</span>You shall make four rings of gold for it, and put the rings in the four corners that are on its four feet. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_27">27&#160;</span>The rings shall be close to the rim, for places for the poles to carry the table. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_28">28&#160;</span>You shall make the poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be carried with them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_29">29&#160;</span>You shall make its dishes, its spoons, its ladles, and its bowls with which to pour out offerings. You shall make them of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_30">30&#160;</span>You shall set bread of the presence on the table before me always. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX25_31">31&#160;</span>“You shall make a lamp stand of pure gold. The lamp stand shall be made of hammered work. Its base, its shaft, its cups, its buds, and its flowers shall be of one piece with it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_32">32&#160;</span>There shall be six branches going out of its sides: three branches of the lamp stand out of its one side, and three branches of the lamp stand out of its other side; 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_33">33&#160;</span>three cups made like almond blossoms in one branch, a bud and a flower; and three cups made like almond blossoms in the other branch, a bud and a flower, so for the six branches going out of the lamp stand; 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_34">34&#160;</span>and in the lamp stand four cups made like almond blossoms, its buds and its flowers; 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_35">35&#160;</span>and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of the lamp stand. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_36">36&#160;</span>Their buds and their branches shall be of one piece with it, all of it one beaten work of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_37">37&#160;</span>You shall make its lamps seven, and they shall light its lamps to give light to the space in front of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_38">38&#160;</span>Its snuffers and its snuff dishes shall be of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_39">39&#160;</span>It shall be made of a talent<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of pure gold, with all these accessories. 
<span class="verse" id="EX25_40">40&#160;</span>See that you make them after their pattern, which has been shown to you on the mountain.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_1">1&#160;</span>“Moreover you shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim. You shall make them with the work of a skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_2">2&#160;</span>The length of each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits,<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and the width of each curtain four cubits: all the curtains shall have one measure. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_3">3&#160;</span>Five curtains shall be coupled together to one another, and the other five curtains shall be coupled to one another. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_4">4&#160;</span>You shall make loops of blue on the edge of the one curtain from the edge in the coupling, and you shall do likewise on the edge of the curtain that is outermost in the second coupling. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_5">5&#160;</span>You shall make fifty loops in the one curtain, and you shall make fifty loops in the edge of the curtain that is in the second coupling. The loops shall be opposite one another. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_6">6&#160;</span>You shall make fifty clasps of gold, and couple the curtains to one another with the clasps. The tabernacle shall be a unit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_7">7&#160;</span>“You shall make curtains of goats’ hair for a covering over the tabernacle. You shall make eleven curtains. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_8">8&#160;</span>The length of each curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the width of each curtain four cubits: the eleven curtains shall have one measure. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_9">9&#160;</span>You shall couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shall double over the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tent. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_10">10&#160;</span>You shall make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outermost in the coupling, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain which is outermost in the second coupling. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_11">11&#160;</span>You shall make fifty clasps of bronze, and put the clasps into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_12">12&#160;</span>The overhanging part that remains of the curtains of the tent—the half curtain that remains—shall hang over the back of the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_13">13&#160;</span>The cubit on the one side and the cubit on the other side, of that which remains in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_14">14&#160;</span>You shall make a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of sea cow hides above. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_15">15&#160;</span>“You shall make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing upright. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_16">16&#160;</span>Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and one and a half cubits the width of each board. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_17">17&#160;</span>There shall be two tenons in each board, joined to one another: thus you shall make for all the boards of the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_18">18&#160;</span>You shall make twenty boards for the tabernacle, for the south side southward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_19">19&#160;</span>You shall make forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards; two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_20">20&#160;</span>For the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards, 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_21">21&#160;</span>and their forty sockets of silver; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_22">22&#160;</span>For the far side of the tabernacle westward you shall make six boards. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_23">23&#160;</span>You shall make two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the far side. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_24">24&#160;</span>They shall be double beneath, and in the same way they shall be whole to its top to one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_25">25&#160;</span>There shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_26">26&#160;</span>“You shall make bars of acacia wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_27">27&#160;</span>and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the far side westward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_28">28&#160;</span>The middle bar in the middle of the boards shall pass through from end to end. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_29">29&#160;</span>You shall overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars. You shall overlay the bars with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_30">30&#160;</span>You shall set up the tabernacle according to the way that it was shown to you on the mountain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_31">31&#160;</span>“You shall make a veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cherubim. It shall be the work of a skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_32">32&#160;</span>You shall hang it on four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold; their hooks shall be of gold, on four sockets of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_33">33&#160;</span>You shall hang up the veil under the clasps, and shall bring the ark of the covenant in there within the veil. The veil shall separate the holy place from the most holy for you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_34">34&#160;</span>You shall put the mercy seat on the ark of the covenant in the most holy place. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_35">35&#160;</span>You shall set the table outside the veil, and the lamp stand opposite the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south. You shall put the table on the north side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX26_36">36&#160;</span>“You shall make a screen for the door of the Tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer. 
<span class="verse" id="EX26_37">37&#160;</span>You shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia, and overlay them with gold. Their hooks shall be of gold. You shall cast five sockets of bronze for them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_1">1&#160;</span>“You shall make the altar of acacia wood, five cubits<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> long, and five cubits wide. The altar shall be square. Its height shall be three cubits.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_2">2&#160;</span>You shall make its horns on its four corners. Its horns shall be of one piece with it. You shall overlay it with bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_3">3&#160;</span>You shall make its pots to take away its ashes; and its shovels, its basins, its meat hooks, and its fire pans. You shall make all its vessels of bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_4">4&#160;</span>You shall make a grating for it of network of bronze. On the net you shall make four bronze rings in its four corners. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_5">5&#160;</span>You shall put it under the ledge around the altar beneath, that the net may reach halfway up the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_6">6&#160;</span>You shall make poles for the altar, poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_7">7&#160;</span>Its poles shall be put into the rings, and the poles shall be on the two sides of the altar when carrying it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_8">8&#160;</span>You shall make it hollow with planks. They shall make it as it has been shown you on the mountain. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_9">9&#160;</span>“You shall make the court of the tabernacle: for the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen one hundred cubits long for one side. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_10">10&#160;</span>Its pillars shall be twenty, and their sockets twenty, of bronze. The hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_11">11&#160;</span>Likewise for the length of the north side, there shall be hangings one hundred cubits long, and its pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of bronze; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_12">12&#160;</span>For the width of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits; their pillars ten, and their sockets ten. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_13">13&#160;</span>The width of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_14">14&#160;</span>The hangings for the one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_15">15&#160;</span>For the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_16">16&#160;</span>For the gate of the court shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer; their pillars four, and their sockets four. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_17">17&#160;</span>All the pillars of the court around shall be filleted with silver; their hooks of silver, and their sockets of bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_18">18&#160;</span>The length of the court shall be one hundred cubits, and the width fifty throughout, and the height five cubits, of fine twined linen, and their sockets of bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_19">19&#160;</span>All the instruments of the tabernacle in all its service, and all its pins, and all the pins of the court, shall be of bronze. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX27_20">20&#160;</span>“You shall command the children of Israel, that they bring to you pure olive oil beaten for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually. 
<span class="verse" id="EX27_21">21&#160;</span>In the Tent of Meeting, outside the veil which is before the covenant, Aaron and his sons shall keep it in order from evening to morning before Yahweh: it shall be a statute forever throughout their generations on the behalf of the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_1">1&#160;</span>“Bring Aaron your brother, and his sons with him, near to you from among the children of Israel, that he may minister to me in the priest’s office: Aaron, with Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, Aaron’s sons. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_2">2&#160;</span>You shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for glory and for beauty. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_3">3&#160;</span>You shall speak to all who are wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make Aaron’s garments to sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_4">4&#160;</span>These are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate, an ephod, a robe, a fitted tunic, a turban, and a sash. They shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother and his sons, that he may minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_5">5&#160;</span>They shall use the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the fine linen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_6">6&#160;</span>“They shall make the ephod of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_7">7&#160;</span>It shall have two shoulder straps joined to the two ends of it, that it may be joined together. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_8">8&#160;</span>The skillfully woven band, which is on it, shall be like its work and of the same piece; of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_9">9&#160;</span>You shall take two onyx stones, and engrave on them the names of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_10">10&#160;</span>Six of their names on the one stone, and the names of the six that remain on the other stone, in the order of their birth. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_11">11&#160;</span>With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, you shall engrave the two stones, according to the names of the children of Israel. You shall make them to be enclosed in settings of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_12">12&#160;</span>You shall put the two stones on the shoulder straps of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel. Aaron shall bear their names before Yahweh on his two shoulders for a memorial. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_13">13&#160;</span>You shall make settings of gold, 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_14">14&#160;</span>and two chains of pure gold; you shall make them like cords of braided work. You shall put the braided chains on the settings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_15">15&#160;</span>“You shall make a breastplate of judgment, the work of the skillful workman; like the work of the ephod you shall make it; of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, you shall make it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_16">16&#160;</span>It shall be square and folded double; a span<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> shall be its length, and a span its width. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_17">17&#160;</span>You shall set in it settings of stones, four rows of stones: a row of ruby, topaz, and beryl shall be the first row; 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_18">18&#160;</span>and the second row a turquoise, a sapphire,<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and an emerald; 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_19">19&#160;</span>and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_20">20&#160;</span>and the fourth row a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. They shall be enclosed in gold in their settings. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_21">21&#160;</span>The stones shall be according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names; like the engravings of a signet, everyone according to his name, they shall be for the twelve tribes. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_22">22&#160;</span>You shall make on the breastplate chains like cords, of braided work of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_23">23&#160;</span>You shall make on the breastplate two rings of gold, and shall put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_24">24&#160;</span>You shall put the two braided chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_25">25&#160;</span>The other two ends of the two braided chains you shall put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder straps of the ephod in its forepart. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_26">26&#160;</span>You shall make two rings of gold, and you shall put them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its edge, which is toward the side of the ephod inward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_27">27&#160;</span>You shall make two rings of gold, and shall put them on the two shoulder straps of the ephod underneath, in its forepart, close by its coupling, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_28">28&#160;</span>They shall bind the breastplate by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be on the skillfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate may not swing out from the ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_29">29&#160;</span>Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment on his heart, when he goes in to the holy place, for a memorial before Yahweh continually. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_30">30&#160;</span>You shall put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim; and they shall be on Aaron’s heart, when he goes in before Yahweh. Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel on his heart before Yahweh continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_31">31&#160;</span>“You shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_32">32&#160;</span>It shall have a hole for the head in the middle of it. It shall have a binding of woven work around its hole, as it were the hole of a coat of mail, that it not be torn. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_33">33&#160;</span>On its hem you shall make pomegranates of blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, all around its hem; with bells of gold between and around them: 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_34">34&#160;</span>a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, around the hem of the robe. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_35">35&#160;</span>It shall be on Aaron to minister: and its sound shall be heard when he goes in to the holy place before Yahweh, and when he comes out, that he not die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_36">36&#160;</span>“You shall make a plate of pure gold, and engrave on it, like the engravings of a signet, ‘HOLY TO YAHWEH.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_37">37&#160;</span>You shall put it on a lace of blue, and it shall be on the sash. It shall be on the front of the sash. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_38">38&#160;</span>It shall be on Aaron’s forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall make holy in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always on his forehead, that they may be accepted before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_39">39&#160;</span>You shall weave the tunic with fine linen. You shall make a turban of fine linen. You shall make a sash, the work of the embroiderer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX28_40">40&#160;</span>“You shall make tunics for Aaron’s sons. You shall make sashes for them. You shall make headbands for them, for glory and for beauty. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_41">41&#160;</span>You shall put them on Aaron your brother, and on his sons with him, and shall anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_42">42&#160;</span>You shall make them linen pants to cover their naked flesh. They shall reach from the waist even to the thighs. 
<span class="verse" id="EX28_43">43&#160;</span>They shall be on Aaron and on his sons, when they go in to the Tent of Meeting, or when they come near to the altar to minister in the holy place, that they don’t bear iniquity, and die. This shall be a statute forever to him and to his offspring after him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_1">1&#160;</span>“This is the thing that you shall do to them to make them holy, to minister to me in the priest’s office: take one young bull and two rams without defect, 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_2">2&#160;</span>unleavened bread, unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil. You shall make them of fine wheat flour. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_3">3&#160;</span>You shall put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bull and the two rams. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_4">4&#160;</span>You shall bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the Tent of Meeting, and shall wash them with water. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_5">5&#160;</span>You shall take the garments, and put on Aaron the tunic, the robe of the ephod, the ephod, and the breastplate, and clothe him with the skillfully woven band of the ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_6">6&#160;</span>You shall set the turban on his head, and put the holy crown on the turban. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_7">7&#160;</span>Then you shall take the anointing oil, and pour it on his head, and anoint him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_8">8&#160;</span>You shall bring his sons, and put tunics on them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_9">9&#160;</span>You shall clothe them with belts, Aaron and his sons, and bind headbands on them. They shall have the priesthood by a perpetual statute. You shall consecrate Aaron and his sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_10">10&#160;</span>“You shall bring the bull before the Tent of Meeting; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the bull. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_11">11&#160;</span>You shall kill the bull before Yahweh at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_12">12&#160;</span>You shall take of the blood of the bull, and put it on the horns of the altar with your finger; and you shall pour out all the blood at the base of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_13">13&#160;</span>You shall take all the fat that covers the innards, the cover of the liver, the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, and burn them on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_14">14&#160;</span>But the meat of the bull, and its skin, and its dung, you shall burn with fire outside of the camp. It is a sin offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_15">15&#160;</span>“You shall also take the one ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_16">16&#160;</span>You shall kill the ram, and you shall take its blood, and sprinkle it around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_17">17&#160;</span>You shall cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its innards, and its legs, and put them with its pieces, and with its head. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_18">18&#160;</span>You shall burn the whole ram on the altar: it is a burnt offering to Yahweh; it is a pleasant aroma, an offering made by fire to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_19">19&#160;</span>“You shall take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands on the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_20">20&#160;</span>Then you shall kill the ram, and take some of its blood, and put it on the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and on the tip of the right ear of his sons, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the big toe of their right foot; and sprinkle the blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_21">21&#160;</span>You shall take of the blood that is on the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it on Aaron, and on his garments, and on his sons, and on the garments of his sons with him: and he shall be made holy, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_22">22&#160;</span>Also you shall take some of the ram’s fat, the fat tail, the fat that covers the innards, the cover of the liver, the two kidneys, the fat that is on them, and the right thigh (for it is a ram of consecration), 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_23">23&#160;</span>and one loaf of bread, one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_24">24&#160;</span>You shall put all of this in Aaron’s hands, and in his sons’ hands, and shall wave them for a wave offering before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_25">25&#160;</span>You shall take them from their hands, and burn them on the altar on the burnt offering, for a pleasant aroma before Yahweh: it is an offering made by fire to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_26">26&#160;</span>“You shall take the breast of Aaron’s ram of consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before Yahweh. It shall be your portion. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_27">27&#160;</span>You shall sanctify the breast of the wave offering and the thigh of the wave offering, which is waved, and which is raised up, of the ram of consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_28">28&#160;</span>It shall be for Aaron and his sons as their portion forever from the children of Israel; for it is a wave offering. It shall be a wave offering from the children of Israel of the sacrifices of their peace offerings, even their wave offering to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_29">29&#160;</span>“The holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to be consecrated in them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_30">30&#160;</span>Seven days shall the son who is priest in his place put them on, when he comes into the Tent of Meeting to minister in the holy place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_31">31&#160;</span>“You shall take the ram of consecration and boil its meat in a holy place. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_32">32&#160;</span>Aaron and his sons shall eat the meat of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_33">33&#160;</span>They shall eat those things with which atonement was made, to consecrate and sanctify them; but a stranger shall not eat of it, because they are holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_34">34&#160;</span>If anything of the meat of the consecration, or of the bread, remains to the morning, then you shall burn the remainder with fire. It shall not be eaten, because it is holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_35">35&#160;</span>“You shall do so to Aaron and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded you. You shall consecrate them seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_36">36&#160;</span>Every day you shall offer the bull of sin offering for atonement. You shall cleanse the altar when you make atonement for it. You shall anoint it, to sanctify it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_37">37&#160;</span>Seven days you shall make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it; and the altar shall be most holy. Whatever touches the altar shall be holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX29_38">38&#160;</span>“Now this is that which you shall offer on the altar: two lambs a year old day by day continually. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_39">39&#160;</span>The one lamb you shall offer in the morning; and the other lamb you shall offer at evening; 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_40">40&#160;</span>and with the one lamb a tenth part of an ephah<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour mixed with the fourth part of a hin<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of beaten oil, and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_41">41&#160;</span>The other lamb you shall offer at evening, and shall do to it according to the meal offering of the morning and according to its drink offering, for a pleasant aroma, an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_42">42&#160;</span>It shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the Tent of Meeting before Yahweh, where I will meet with you, to speak there to you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_43">43&#160;</span>There I will meet with the children of Israel; and the place shall be sanctified by my glory. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_44">44&#160;</span>I will sanctify the Tent of Meeting and the altar. I will also sanctify Aaron and his sons to minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_45">45&#160;</span>I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their God. 
<span class="verse" id="EX29_46">46&#160;</span>They shall know that I am Yahweh their God, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, that I might dwell among them: I am Yahweh their God.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_1">1&#160;</span>“You shall make an altar to burn incense on. You shall make it of acacia wood. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_2">2&#160;</span>Its length shall be a cubit,<a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and its width a cubit. It shall be square, and its height shall be two cubits. Its horns shall be of one piece with it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_3">3&#160;</span>You shall overlay it with pure gold, its top, its sides around it, and its horns; and you shall make a gold molding around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_4">4&#160;</span>You shall make two golden rings for it under its molding; on its two ribs, on its two sides you shall make them; and they shall be for places for poles with which to bear it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_5">5&#160;</span>You shall make the poles of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_6">6&#160;</span>You shall put it before the veil that is by the ark of the covenant, before the mercy seat that is over the covenant, where I will meet with you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_7">7&#160;</span>Aaron shall burn incense of sweet spices on it every morning. When he tends the lamps, he shall burn it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_8">8&#160;</span>When Aaron lights the lamps at evening, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before Yahweh throughout your generations. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_9">9&#160;</span>You shall offer no strange incense on it, nor burnt offering, nor meal offering; and you shall pour no drink offering on it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_10">10&#160;</span>Aaron shall make atonement on its horns once in the year; with the blood of the sin offering of atonement once in the year he shall make atonement for it throughout your generations. It is most holy to Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_12">12&#160;</span>“When you take a census of the children of Israel, according to those who are counted among them, then each man shall give a ransom for his soul to Yahweh when you count them, that there be no plague among them when you count them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_13">13&#160;</span>They shall give this, everyone who passes over to those who are counted, half a shekel according to the shekel<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of the sanctuary (the shekel is twenty gerahs<a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>); half a shekel for an offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_14">14&#160;</span>Everyone who passes over to those who are counted, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_15">15&#160;</span>The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, than the half shekel,<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> when they give the offering of Yahweh, to make atonement for your souls. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_16">16&#160;</span>You shall take the atonement money from the children of Israel, and shall appoint it for the service of the Tent of Meeting; that it may be a memorial for the children of Israel before Yahweh, to make atonement for your souls.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_18">18&#160;</span>“You shall also make a basin of bronze, and its base of bronze, in which to wash. You shall put it between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and you shall put water in it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_19">19&#160;</span>Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet in it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_20">20&#160;</span>When they go into the Tent of Meeting, they shall wash with water, that they not die; or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_21">21&#160;</span>So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they not die. This shall be a statute forever to them, even to him and to his descendants throughout their generations.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_22">22&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_23">23&#160;</span>“Also take fine spices: of liquid myrrh, five hundred shekels;<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and of fragrant cinnamon half as much, even two hundred and fifty; and of fragrant cane, two hundred and fifty; 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_24">24&#160;</span>and of cassia five hundred, according to the shekel of the sanctuary; and a hin<a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of olive oil. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_25">25&#160;</span>You shall make it into a holy anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer: it shall be a holy anointing oil. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_26">26&#160;</span>You shall use it to anoint the Tent of Meeting, the ark of the covenant, 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_27">27&#160;</span>the table and all its articles, the lamp stand and its accessories, the altar of incense, 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_28">28&#160;</span>the altar of burnt offering with all its utensils, and the basin with its base. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_29">29&#160;</span>You shall sanctify them, that they may be most holy. Whatever touches them shall be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_30">30&#160;</span>You shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_31">31&#160;</span>You shall speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘This shall be a holy anointing oil to me throughout your generations. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_32">32&#160;</span>It shall not be poured on man’s flesh, and do not make any like it, according to its composition. It is holy. It shall be holy to you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_33">33&#160;</span>Whoever compounds any like it, or whoever puts any of it on a stranger, he shall be cut off from his people.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX30_34">34&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Take to yourself sweet spices, gum resin, onycha, and galbanum: sweet spices with pure frankincense. There shall be an equal weight of each. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_35">35&#160;</span>You shall make incense of it, a perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_36">36&#160;</span>You shall beat some of it very small, and put some of it before the covenant in the Tent of Meeting, where I will meet with you. It shall be to you most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_37">37&#160;</span>You shall not make this incense, according to its composition, for yourselves: it shall be to you holy for Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX30_38">38&#160;</span>Whoever shall make any like that, to smell of it, he shall be cut off from his people.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX31_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_2">2&#160;</span>“Behold, I have called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_3">3&#160;</span>I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all kinds of workmanship, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_4">4&#160;</span>to devise skillful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in bronze, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_5">5&#160;</span>and in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all kinds of workmanship. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_6">6&#160;</span>Behold, I myself have appointed with him Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the heart of all who are wise-hearted I have put wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded you: 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_7">7&#160;</span>the Tent of Meeting, the ark of the covenant, the mercy seat that is on it, all the furniture of the Tent, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_8">8&#160;</span>the table and its vessels, the pure lamp stand with all its vessels, the altar of incense, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_9">9&#160;</span>the altar of burnt offering with all its vessels, the basin and its base, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_10">10&#160;</span>the finely worked garments—the holy garments for Aaron the priest, the garments of his sons to minister in the priest’s office— 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_11">11&#160;</span>the anointing oil, and the incense of sweet spices for the holy place: according to all that I have commanded you they shall do.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_13">13&#160;</span>“Speak also to the children of Israel, saying, ‘Most certainly you shall keep my Sabbaths; for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that you may know that I am Yahweh who sanctifies you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_14">14&#160;</span>You shall keep the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy to you. Everyone who profanes it shall surely be put to death; for whoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_15">15&#160;</span>Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of solemn rest, holy to Yahweh. Whoever does any work on the Sabbath day shall surely be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="EX31_17">17&#160;</span>It is a sign between me and the children of Israel forever; for in six days Yahweh made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX31_18">18&#160;</span>When he finished speaking with him on Mount Sinai, he gave Moses the two tablets of the covenant, stone tablets, written with God’s finger.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX32_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_1">1&#160;</span>When the people saw that Moses delayed coming down from the mountain, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron, and said to him, “Come, make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we don’t know what has become of him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_2">2&#160;</span>Aaron said to them, “Take off the golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_3">3&#160;</span>All the people took off the golden rings which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_4">4&#160;</span>He received what they handed him, fashioned it with an engraving tool, and made it a molded calf. Then they said, “These are your gods, Israel, which brought you up out of the land of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_5">5&#160;</span>When Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it; and Aaron made a proclamation, and said, “Tomorrow shall be a feast to Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_6">6&#160;</span>They rose up early on the next day, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, “Go, get down; for your people, whom you brought up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves! 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_8">8&#160;</span>They have turned away quickly out of the way which I commanded them. They have made themselves a molded calf, and have worshiped it, and have sacrificed to it, and said, ‘These are your gods, Israel, which brought you up out of the land of Egypt.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “I have seen these people, and behold, they are a stiff-necked people. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_10">10&#160;</span>Now therefore leave me alone, that my wrath may burn hot against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of you a great nation.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_11">11&#160;</span>Moses begged Yahweh his God, and said, “Yahweh, why does your wrath burn hot against your people, that you have brought out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand? 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_12">12&#160;</span>Why should the Egyptians talk, saying, ‘He brought them out for evil, to kill them in the mountains, and to consume them from the surface of the earth?’ Turn from your fierce wrath, and turn away from this evil against your people. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_13">13&#160;</span>Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, your servants, to whom you swore by your own self, and said to them, ‘I will multiply your offspring<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> as the stars of the sky, and all this land that I have spoken of I will give to your offspring, and they shall inherit it forever.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_14">14&#160;</span>So Yahweh turned away from the evil which he said he would do to his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_15">15&#160;</span>Moses turned, and went down from the mountain, with the two tablets of the covenant in his hand; tablets that were written on both their sides. They were written on one side and on the other. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_16">16&#160;</span>The tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved on the tablets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_17">17&#160;</span>When Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, “There is the noise of war in the camp.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_18">18&#160;</span>He said, “It isn’t the voice of those who shout for victory. It is not the voice of those who cry for being overcome; but the noise of those who sing that I hear.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_19">19&#160;</span>As soon as he came near to the camp, he saw the calf and the dancing. Then Moses’ anger grew hot, and he threw the tablets out of his hands, and broke them beneath the mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_20">20&#160;</span>He took the calf which they had made, and burned it with fire, ground it to powder, and scattered it on the water, and made the children of Israel drink it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_21">21&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron, “What did these people do to you, that you have brought a great sin on them?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_22">22&#160;</span>Aaron said, “Don’t let the anger of my lord grow hot. You know the people, that they are set on evil. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_23">23&#160;</span>For they said to me, ‘Make us gods, which shall go before us. As for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we don’t know what has become of him.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_24">24&#160;</span>I said to them, ‘Whoever has any gold, let them take it off.’ So they gave it to me; and I threw it into the fire, and out came this calf.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_25">25&#160;</span>When Moses saw that the people were out of control, (for Aaron had let them lose control, causing derision among their enemies), 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_26">26&#160;</span>then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, “Whoever is on Yahweh’s side, come to me!” </div>
<div class='p'>All the sons of Levi gathered themselves together to him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_27">27&#160;</span>He said to them, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘Every man put his sword on his thigh, and go back and forth from gate to gate throughout the camp, and every man kill his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_28">28&#160;</span>The sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses. About three thousand men fell of the people that day. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_29">29&#160;</span>Moses said, “Consecrate yourselves today to Yahweh, for every man was against his son and against his brother, that he may give you a blessing today.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_30">30&#160;</span>On the next day, Moses said to the people, “You have sinned a great sin. Now I will go up to Yahweh. Perhaps I shall make atonement for your sin.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_31">31&#160;</span>Moses returned to Yahweh, and said, “Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made themselves gods of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_32">32&#160;</span>Yet now, if you will, forgive their sin—and if not, please blot me out of your book which you have written.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX32_33">33&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Whoever has sinned against me, I will blot him out of my book. 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_34">34&#160;</span>Now go, lead the people to the place of which I have spoken to you. Behold, my angel shall go before you. Nevertheless, in the day when I punish, I will punish them for their sin.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX32_35">35&#160;</span>Yahweh struck the people, because of what they did with the calf, which Aaron made.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX33_0'>33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, “Depart, go up from here, you and the people that you have brought up out of the land of Egypt, to the land of which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, ‘I will give it to your offspring.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_2">2&#160;</span>I will send an angel before you; and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_3">3&#160;</span>Go to a land flowing with milk and honey; but I will not go up among you, for you are a stiff-necked people, lest I consume you on the way.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_4">4&#160;</span>When the people heard this evil news, they mourned; and no one put on his jewelry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh had said to Moses, “Tell the children of Israel, ‘You are a stiff-necked people. If I were to go up among you for one moment, I would consume you. Therefore now take off your jewelry from you, that I may know what to do to you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_6">6&#160;</span>The children of Israel stripped themselves of their jewelry from Mount Horeb onward. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_7">7&#160;</span>Now Moses used to take the tent and pitch it outside the camp, far away from the camp, and he called it “The Tent of Meeting.” Everyone who sought Yahweh went out to the Tent of Meeting, which was outside the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_8">8&#160;</span>When Moses went out to the Tent, all the people rose up, and stood, everyone at their tent door, and watched Moses, until he had gone into the Tent. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_9">9&#160;</span>When Moses entered into the Tent, the pillar of cloud descended, stood at the door of the Tent, and Yahweh spoke with Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_10">10&#160;</span>All the people saw the pillar of cloud stand at the door of the Tent, and all the people rose up and worshiped, everyone at their tent door. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. He turned again into the camp, but his servant Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, didn’t depart from the Tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_12">12&#160;</span>Moses said to Yahweh, “Behold, you tell me, ‘Bring up this people;’ and you haven’t let me know whom you will send with me. Yet you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you have also found favor in my sight.’ 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_13">13&#160;</span>Now therefore, if I have found favor in your sight, please show me your way, now, that I may know you, so that I may find favor in your sight; and consider that this nation is your people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_14">14&#160;</span>He said, “My presence will go with you, and I will give you rest.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_15">15&#160;</span>Moses said to him, “If your presence doesn’t go with me, don’t carry us up from here. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_16">16&#160;</span>For how would people know that I have found favor in your sight, I and your people? Isn’t it that you go with us, so that we are separated, I and your people, from all the people who are on the surface of the earth?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “I will do this thing also that you have spoken; for you have found favor in my sight, and I know you by name.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_18">18&#160;</span>Moses said, “Please show me your glory.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX33_19">19&#160;</span>He said, “I will make all my goodness pass before you, and will proclaim Yahweh’s name before you. I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_20">20&#160;</span>He said, “You cannot see my face, for man may not see me and live.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh also said, “Behold, there is a place by me, and you shall stand on the rock. 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_22">22&#160;</span>It will happen, while my glory passes by, that I will put you in a cleft of the rock, and will cover you with my hand until I have passed by; 
<span class="verse" id="EX33_23">23&#160;</span>then I will take away my hand, and you will see my back; but my face shall not be seen.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX34_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Chisel two stone tablets like the first. I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which you broke. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_2">2&#160;</span>Be ready by the morning, and come up in the morning to Mount Sinai, and present yourself there to me on the top of the mountain. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_3">3&#160;</span>No one shall come up with you or be seen anywhere on the mountain. Do not let the flocks or herds graze in front of that mountain.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_4">4&#160;</span>He chiseled two tablets of stone like the first; then Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up to Mount Sinai, as Yahweh had commanded him, and took in his hand two stone tablets. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed Yahweh’s name. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh passed by before him, and proclaimed, “Yahweh! Yahweh, a merciful and gracious God, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness and truth, 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_7">7&#160;</span>keeping loving kindness for thousands, forgiving iniquity and disobedience and sin; and who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers on the children, and on the children’s children, on the third and on the fourth generation.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_8">8&#160;</span>Moses hurried and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshiped. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_9">9&#160;</span>He said, “If now I have found favor in your sight, Lord, please let the Lord go among us, even though this is a stiff-necked people; pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for your inheritance.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_10">10&#160;</span>He said, “Behold, I make a covenant: before all your people I will do marvels, such as have not been worked in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people among whom you are shall see the work of Yahweh; for it is an awesome thing that I do with you. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_11">11&#160;</span>Observe that which I command you today. Behold, I will drive out before you the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_12">12&#160;</span>Be careful, lest you make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land where you are going, lest it be for a snare among you; 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_13">13&#160;</span>but you shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and you shall cut down their Asherah poles; 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_14">14&#160;</span>for you shall worship no other god; for Yahweh, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_15">15&#160;</span>“Don’t make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, lest they play the prostitute after their gods, and sacrifice to their gods, and one call you and you eat of his sacrifice; 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_16">16&#160;</span>and you take of their daughters to your sons, and their daughters play the prostitute after their gods, and make your sons play the prostitute after their gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_17">17&#160;</span>“You shall make no cast idols for yourselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_18">18&#160;</span>“You shall keep the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded you, at the time appointed in the month Abib; for in the month Abib you came out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_19">19&#160;</span>“All that opens the womb is mine; and all your livestock that is male, the firstborn of cow and sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_20">20&#160;</span>You shall redeem the firstborn of a donkey with a lamb. If you will not redeem it, then you shall break its neck. You shall redeem all the firstborn of your sons. No one shall appear before me empty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_21">21&#160;</span>“Six days you shall work, but on the seventh day you shall rest: in plowing time and in harvest you shall rest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_22">22&#160;</span>“You shall observe the feast of weeks with the first fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of harvest at the year’s end. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_23">23&#160;</span>Three times in the year all your males shall appear before the Lord Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_24">24&#160;</span>For I will drive out nations before you and enlarge your borders; neither shall any man desire your land when you go up to appear before Yahweh, your God, three times in the year. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_25">25&#160;</span>“You shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread. The sacrifice of the feast of the Passover shall not be left to the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_26">26&#160;</span>“You shall bring the first of the first fruits of your ground to the house of Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>“You shall not boil a young goat in its mother’s milk.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_27">27&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Write these words; for in accordance with these words I have made a covenant with you and with Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_28">28&#160;</span>He was there with Yahweh forty days and forty nights; he neither ate bread, nor drank water. He wrote on the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten commandments. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX34_29">29&#160;</span>When Moses came down from Mount Sinai with the two tablets of the covenant in Moses’ hand, when he came down from the mountain, Moses didn’t know that the skin of his face shone by reason of his speaking with him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_30">30&#160;</span>When Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come near him. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_31">31&#160;</span>Moses called to them, and Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned to him; and Moses spoke to them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_32">32&#160;</span>Afterward all the children of Israel came near, and he gave them all the commandments that Yahweh had spoken with him on Mount Sinai. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_33">33&#160;</span>When Moses was done speaking with them, he put a veil on his face. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_34">34&#160;</span>But when Moses went in before Yahweh to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out; and he came out, and spoke to the children of Israel that which he was commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="EX34_35">35&#160;</span>The children of Israel saw Moses’ face, that the skin of Moses’ face shone; so Moses put the veil on his face again, until he went in to speak with him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX35_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_1">1&#160;</span>Moses assembled all the congregation of the children of Israel, and said to them, “These are the words which Yahweh has commanded, that you should do them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_2">2&#160;</span>‘Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be a holy day for you, a Sabbath of solemn rest to Yahweh: whoever does any work in it shall be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_3">3&#160;</span>You shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations on the Sabbath day.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_4">4&#160;</span>Moses spoke to all the congregation of the children of Israel, saying, “This is the thing which Yahweh commanded, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_5">5&#160;</span>‘Take from among you an offering to Yahweh. Whoever is of a willing heart, let him bring it as Yahweh’s offering: gold, silver, bronze, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_6">6&#160;</span>blue, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goats’ hair, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_7">7&#160;</span>rams’ skins dyed red, sea cow hides, acacia wood, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_8">8&#160;</span>oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet incense, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_9">9&#160;</span>onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘Let every wise-hearted man among you come, and make all that Yahweh has commanded: 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_11">11&#160;</span>the tabernacle, its outer covering, its roof, its clasps, its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its sockets; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_12">12&#160;</span>the ark, and its poles, the mercy seat, the veil of the screen; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_13">13&#160;</span>the table with its poles and all its vessels, and the show bread; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_14">14&#160;</span>the lamp stand also for the light, with its vessels, its lamps, and the oil for the light; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_15">15&#160;</span>and the altar of incense with its poles, the anointing oil, the sweet incense, the screen for the door, at the door of the tabernacle; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_16">16&#160;</span>the altar of burnt offering, with its grating of bronze, its poles, and all its vessels, the basin and its base; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_17">17&#160;</span>the hangings of the court, its pillars, their sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_18">18&#160;</span>the pins of the tabernacle, the pins of the court, and their cords; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_19">19&#160;</span>the finely worked garments for ministering in the holy place—the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons—to minister in the priest’s office.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_20">20&#160;</span>All the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_21">21&#160;</span>They came, everyone whose heart stirred him up, and everyone whom his spirit made willing, and brought Yahweh’s offering for the work of the Tent of Meeting, and for all of its service, and for the holy garments. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_22">22&#160;</span>They came, both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought brooches, earrings, signet rings, and armlets, all jewels of gold; even every man who offered an offering of gold to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_23">23&#160;</span>Everyone with whom was found blue, purple, scarlet, fine linen, goats’ hair, rams’ skins dyed red, and sea cow hides, brought them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_24">24&#160;</span>Everyone who offered an offering of silver and bronze brought Yahweh’s offering; and everyone with whom was found acacia wood for any work of the service, brought it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_25">25&#160;</span>All the women who were wise-hearted spun with their hands, and brought that which they had spun: the blue, the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_26">26&#160;</span>All the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun the goats’ hair. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_27">27&#160;</span>The rulers brought the onyx stones and the stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_28">28&#160;</span>with the spice and the oil for the light, for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_29">29&#160;</span>The children of Israel brought a free will offering to Yahweh; every man and woman whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work, which Yahweh had commanded to be made by Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX35_30">30&#160;</span>Moses said to the children of Israel, “Behold, Yahweh has called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_31">31&#160;</span>He has filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, in knowledge, and in all kinds of workmanship; 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_32">32&#160;</span>and to make skillful works, to work in gold, in silver, in bronze, 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_33">33&#160;</span>in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all kinds of skillful workmanship. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_34">34&#160;</span>He has put in his heart that he may teach, both he and Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan. 
<span class="verse" id="EX35_35">35&#160;</span>He has filled them with wisdom of heart to work all kinds of workmanship, of the engraver, of the skillful workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of those who do any workmanship, and of those who make skillful works.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX36_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_1">1&#160;</span>“Bezalel and Oholiab shall work with every wise-hearted man, in whom Yahweh has put wisdom and understanding to know how to do all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that Yahweh has commanded.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_2">2&#160;</span>Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart Yahweh had put wisdom, even everyone whose heart stirred him up to come to the work to do it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_3">3&#160;</span>They received from Moses all the offering which the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, with which to make it. They kept bringing free will offerings to him every morning. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_4">4&#160;</span>All the wise men, who performed all the work of the sanctuary, each came from his work which he did. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_5">5&#160;</span>They spoke to Moses, saying, “The people have brought much more than enough for the service of the work which Yahweh commanded to make.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_6">6&#160;</span>Moses gave a commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, “Let neither man nor woman make anything else for the offering for the sanctuary.” So the people were restrained from bringing. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_7">7&#160;</span>For the stuff they had was sufficient to do all the work, and too much. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_8">8&#160;</span>All the wise-hearted men among those who did the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains of fine twined linen, blue, purple, and scarlet. They made them with cherubim, the work of a skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_9">9&#160;</span>The length of each curtain was twenty-eight cubits,<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and the width of each curtain four cubits. All the curtains had one measure. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_10">10&#160;</span>He coupled five curtains to one another, and the other five curtains he coupled to one another. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_11">11&#160;</span>He made loops of blue on the edge of the one curtain from the edge in the coupling. Likewise he made in the edge of the curtain that was outermost in the second coupling. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_12">12&#160;</span>He made fifty loops in the one curtain, and he made fifty loops in the edge of the curtain that was in the second coupling. The loops were opposite to one another. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_13">13&#160;</span>He made fifty clasps of gold, and coupled the curtains to one another with the clasps: so the tabernacle was a unit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_14">14&#160;</span>He made curtains of goats’ hair for a covering over the tabernacle. He made them eleven curtains. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_15">15&#160;</span>The length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the width of each curtain. The eleven curtains had one measure. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_16">16&#160;</span>He coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_17">17&#160;</span>He made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outermost in the coupling, and he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain which was outermost in the second coupling. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_18">18&#160;</span>He made fifty clasps of bronze to couple the tent together, that it might be a unit. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_19">19&#160;</span>He made a covering for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering of sea cow hides above. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_20">20&#160;</span>He made the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_21">21&#160;</span>Ten cubits was the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the width of each board. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_22">22&#160;</span>Each board had two tenons, joined to one another. He made all the boards of the tabernacle this way. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_23">23&#160;</span>He made the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_24">24&#160;</span>He made forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards: two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_25">25&#160;</span>For the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_26">26&#160;</span>and their forty sockets of silver: two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_27">27&#160;</span>For the far part of the tabernacle westward he made six boards. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_28">28&#160;</span>He made two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the far part. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_29">29&#160;</span>They were double beneath, and in the same way they were all the way to its top to one ring. He did this to both of them in the two corners. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_30">30&#160;</span>There were eight boards and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets—under every board two sockets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_31">31&#160;</span>He made bars of acacia wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle, 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_32">32&#160;</span>and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the hinder part westward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_33">33&#160;</span>He made the middle bar to pass through in the middle of the boards from the one end to the other. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_34">34&#160;</span>He overlaid the boards with gold, and made their rings of gold as places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX36_35">35&#160;</span>He made the veil of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cherubim. He made it the work of a skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_36">36&#160;</span>He made four pillars of acacia for it, and overlaid them with gold. Their hooks were of gold. He cast four sockets of silver for them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_37">37&#160;</span>He made a screen for the door of the tent, of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of an embroiderer; 
<span class="verse" id="EX36_38">38&#160;</span>and the five pillars of it with their hooks. He overlaid their capitals and their fillets with gold, and their five sockets were of bronze.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX37_0'>37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_1">1&#160;</span>Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood. Its length was two and a half cubits,<a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and its width a cubit and a half, and a cubit and a half its height. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_2">2&#160;</span>He overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside, and made a molding of gold for it around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_3">3&#160;</span>He cast four rings of gold for it in its four feet—two rings on its one side, and two rings on its other side. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_4">4&#160;</span>He made poles of acacia wood and overlaid them with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_5">5&#160;</span>He put the poles into the rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_6">6&#160;</span>He made a mercy seat of pure gold. Its length was two and a half cubits, and a cubit and a half its width. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_7">7&#160;</span>He made two cherubim of gold. He made them of beaten work, at the two ends of the mercy seat: 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_8">8&#160;</span>one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end. He made the cherubim of one piece with the mercy seat at its two ends. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_9">9&#160;</span>The cherubim spread out their wings above, covering the mercy seat with their wings, with their faces toward one another. The faces of the cherubim were toward the mercy seat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_10">10&#160;</span>He made the table of acacia wood. Its length was two cubits, and its width was a cubit, and its height was a cubit and a half. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_11">11&#160;</span>He overlaid it with pure gold, and made a gold molding around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_12">12&#160;</span>He made a border of a hand’s width around it, and made a golden molding on its border around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_13">13&#160;</span>He cast four rings of gold for it, and put the rings in the four corners that were on its four feet. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_14">14&#160;</span>The rings were close by the border, the places for the poles to carry the table. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_15">15&#160;</span>He made the poles of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold, to carry the table. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_16">16&#160;</span>He made the vessels which were on the table, its dishes, its spoons, its bowls, and its pitchers with which to pour out, of pure gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_17">17&#160;</span>He made the lamp stand of pure gold. He made the lamp stand of beaten work. Its base, its shaft, its cups, its buds, and its flowers were of one piece with it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_18">18&#160;</span>There were six branches going out of its sides: three branches of the lamp stand out of its one side, and three branches of the lamp stand out of its other side: 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_19">19&#160;</span>three cups made like almond blossoms in one branch, a bud and a flower, and three cups made like almond blossoms in the other branch, a bud and a flower; so for the six branches going out of the lamp stand. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_20">20&#160;</span>In the lamp stand were four cups made like almond blossoms, its buds and its flowers; 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_21">21&#160;</span>and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, and a bud under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_22">22&#160;</span>Their buds and their branches were of one piece with it. The whole thing was one beaten work of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_23">23&#160;</span>He made its seven lamps, and its snuffers, and its snuff dishes, of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_24">24&#160;</span>He made it of a talent<a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of pure gold, with all its vessels. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX37_25">25&#160;</span>He made the altar of incense of acacia wood. It was square: its length was a cubit, and its width a cubit. Its height was two cubits. Its horns were of one piece with it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_26">26&#160;</span>He overlaid it with pure gold: its top, its sides around it, and its horns. He made a gold molding around it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_27">27&#160;</span>He made two golden rings for it under its molding crown, on its two ribs, on its two sides, for places for poles with which to carry it. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_28">28&#160;</span>He made the poles of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX37_29">29&#160;</span>He made the holy anointing oil and the pure incense of sweet spices, after the art of the perfumer.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX38_0'>38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_1">1&#160;</span>He made the altar of burnt offering of acacia wood. It was square. Its length was five cubits,<a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> its width was five cubits, and its height was three cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_2">2&#160;</span>He made its horns on its four corners. Its horns were of one piece with it, and he overlaid it with bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_3">3&#160;</span>He made all the vessels of the altar: the pots, the shovels, the basins, the forks, and the fire pans. He made all its vessels of bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_4">4&#160;</span>He made for the altar a grating of a network of bronze, under the ledge around it beneath, reaching halfway up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_5">5&#160;</span>He cast four rings for the four corners of bronze grating, to be places for the poles. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_6">6&#160;</span>He made the poles of acacia wood, and overlaid them with bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_7">7&#160;</span>He put the poles into the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to carry it. He made it hollow with planks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_8">8&#160;</span>He made the basin of bronze, and its base of bronze, out of the mirrors of the ministering women who ministered at the door of the Tent of Meeting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_9">9&#160;</span>He made the court: for the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, one hundred cubits; 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_10">10&#160;</span>their pillars were twenty, and their sockets twenty, of bronze; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_11">11&#160;</span>For the north side one hundred cubits, their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of bronze; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_12">12&#160;</span>For the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten; the hooks of the pillars, and their fillets, of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_13">13&#160;</span>For the east side eastward fifty cubits, 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_14">14&#160;</span>the hangings for the one side were fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three; 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_15">15&#160;</span>and so for the other side: on this hand and that hand by the gate of the court were hangings of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their sockets three. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_16">16&#160;</span>All the hangings around the court were of fine twined linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_17">17&#160;</span>The sockets for the pillars were of bronze. The hooks of the pillars and their fillets were of silver. Their capitals were overlaid with silver. All the pillars of the court had silver bands. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_18">18&#160;</span>The screen for the gate of the court was the work of the embroiderer, of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen. Twenty cubits was the length, and the height along the width was five cubits, like the hangings of the court. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_19">19&#160;</span>Their pillars were four, and their sockets four, of bronze; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals, and their fillets, of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_20">20&#160;</span>All the pins of the tabernacle, and around the court, were of bronze. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_21">21&#160;</span>These are the amounts of materials used for the tabernacle, even the Tabernacle of the Testimony, as they were counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_22">22&#160;</span>Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_23">23&#160;</span>With him was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a skillful workman, and an embroiderer in blue, in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX38_24">24&#160;</span>All the gold that was used for the work in all the work of the sanctuary, even the gold of the offering, was twenty-nine talents<a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and seven hundred thirty shekels, according to the shekel<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_25">25&#160;</span>The silver of those who were counted of the congregation was one hundred talents<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> and one thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels,<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> according to the shekel of the sanctuary: 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_26">26&#160;</span>a beka<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> a head, that is, half a shekel, according to the shekel<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of the sanctuary, for everyone who passed over to those who were counted, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred three thousand five hundred fifty men. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_27">27&#160;</span>The one hundred talents<a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary and the sockets of the veil: one hundred sockets for the one hundred talents, one talent per socket. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_28">28&#160;</span>From the one thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> he made hooks for the pillars, overlaid their capitals, and made fillets for them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_29">29&#160;</span>The bronze of the offering was seventy talents<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and two thousand four hundred shekels.<a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_30">30&#160;</span>With this he made the sockets to the door of the Tent of Meeting, the bronze altar, the bronze grating for it, all the vessels of the altar, 
<span class="verse" id="EX38_31">31&#160;</span>the sockets around the court, the sockets of the gate of the court, all the pins of the tabernacle, and all the pins around the court.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX39_0'>39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_1">1&#160;</span>Of the blue, purple, and scarlet, they made finely worked garments for ministering in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_2">2&#160;</span>He made the ephod of gold, blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_3">3&#160;</span>They beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in with the blue, the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen, the work of the skillful workman. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_4">4&#160;</span>They made shoulder straps for it, joined together. It was joined together at the two ends. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_5">5&#160;</span>The skillfully woven band that was on it, with which to fasten it on, was of the same piece, like its work: of gold, of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_6">6&#160;</span>They worked the onyx stones, enclosed in settings of gold, engraved with the engravings of a signet, according to the names of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_7">7&#160;</span>He put them on the shoulder straps of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the children of Israel, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_8">8&#160;</span>He made the breastplate, the work of a skillful workman, like the work of the ephod: of gold, of blue, purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_9">9&#160;</span>It was square. They made the breastplate double. Its length was a span,<a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and its width a span, being double. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_10">10&#160;</span>They set in it four rows of stones. A row of ruby, topaz, and beryl was the first row; 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_11">11&#160;</span>and the second row, a turquoise, a sapphire,<a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and an emerald; 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_12">12&#160;</span>and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst; 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_13">13&#160;</span>and the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper. They were enclosed in gold settings. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_14">14&#160;</span>The stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names; like the engravings of a signet, everyone according to his name, for the twelve tribes. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_15">15&#160;</span>They made on the breastplate chains like cords, of braided work of pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_16">16&#160;</span>They made two settings of gold, and two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_17">17&#160;</span>They put the two braided chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_18">18&#160;</span>The other two ends of the two braided chains they put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder straps of the ephod, in its front. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_19">19&#160;</span>They made two rings of gold, and put them on the two ends of the breastplate, on its edge, which was toward the side of the ephod inward. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_20">20&#160;</span>They made two more rings of gold, and put them on the two shoulder straps of the ephod underneath, in its front, close by its coupling, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_21">21&#160;</span>They bound the breastplate by its rings to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be on the skillfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not come loose from the ephod, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_22">22&#160;</span>He made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_23">23&#160;</span>The opening of the robe in the middle of it was like the opening of a coat of mail, with a binding around its opening, that it should not be torn. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_24">24&#160;</span>They made on the skirts of the robe pomegranates of blue, purple, scarlet, and twined linen. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_25">25&#160;</span>They made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates around the skirts of the robe, between the pomegranates; 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_26">26&#160;</span>a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, around the skirts of the robe, to minister in, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_27">27&#160;</span>They made the tunics of fine linen of woven work for Aaron and for his sons, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_28">28&#160;</span>the turban of fine linen, the linen headbands of fine linen, the linen trousers of fine twined linen, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_29">29&#160;</span>the sash of fine twined linen, blue, purple, and scarlet, the work of the embroiderer, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_30">30&#160;</span>They made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote on it an inscription, like the engravings of a signet: “HOLY TO YAHWEH”. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_31">31&#160;</span>They tied to it a lace of blue, to fasten it on the turban above, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX39_32">32&#160;</span>Thus all the work of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting was finished. The children of Israel did according to all that Yahweh commanded Moses; so they did. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_33">33&#160;</span>They brought the tabernacle to Moses: the tent, with all its furniture, its clasps, its boards, its bars, its pillars, its sockets, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_34">34&#160;</span>the covering of rams’ skins dyed red, the covering of sea cow hides, the veil of the screen, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_35">35&#160;</span>the ark of the covenant with its poles, the mercy seat, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_36">36&#160;</span>the table, all its vessels, the show bread, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_37">37&#160;</span>the pure lamp stand, its lamps, even the lamps to be set in order, all its vessels, the oil for the light, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_38">38&#160;</span>the golden altar, the anointing oil, the sweet incense, the screen for the door of the Tent, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_39">39&#160;</span>the bronze altar, its grating of bronze, its poles, all of its vessels, the basin and its base, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_40">40&#160;</span>the hangings of the court, its pillars, its sockets, the screen for the gate of the court, its cords, its pins, and all the instruments of the service of the tabernacle, for the Tent of Meeting, 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_41">41&#160;</span>the finely worked garments for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_42">42&#160;</span>According to all that Yahweh commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did all the work. 
<span class="verse" id="EX39_43">43&#160;</span>Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Yahweh had commanded. They had done so; and Moses blessed them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='EX40_0'>40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_2">2&#160;</span>“On the first day of the first month you shall raise up the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_3">3&#160;</span>You shall put the ark of the covenant in it, and you shall screen the ark with the veil. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_4">4&#160;</span>You shall bring in the table, and set in order the things that are on it. You shall bring in the lamp stand, and light its lamps. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_5">5&#160;</span>You shall set the golden altar for incense before the ark of the covenant, and put the screen of the door to the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_6">6&#160;</span>“You shall set the altar of burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_7">7&#160;</span>You shall set the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and shall put water therein. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_8">8&#160;</span>You shall set up the court around it, and hang up the screen of the gate of the court. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_9">9&#160;</span>“You shall take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle and all that is in it, and shall make it holy, and all its furniture, and it will be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_10">10&#160;</span>You shall anoint the altar of burnt offering, with all its vessels, and sanctify the altar, and the altar will be most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_11">11&#160;</span>You shall anoint the basin and its base, and sanctify it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_12">12&#160;</span>“You shall bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the Tent of Meeting, and shall wash them with water. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_13">13&#160;</span>You shall put on Aaron the holy garments; and you shall anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest’s office. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_14">14&#160;</span>You shall bring his sons, and put tunics on them. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_15">15&#160;</span>You shall anoint them, as you anointed their father, that they may minister to me in the priest’s office. Their anointing shall be to them for an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.” 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_16">16&#160;</span>Moses did so. According to all that Yahweh commanded him, so he did. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_17">17&#160;</span>In the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, the tabernacle was raised up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_18">18&#160;</span>Moses raised up the tabernacle, and laid its sockets, and set up its boards, and put in its bars, and raised up its pillars. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_19">19&#160;</span>He spread the covering over the tent, and put the roof of the tabernacle above on it, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_20">20&#160;</span>He took and put the covenant into the ark, and set the poles on the ark, and put the mercy seat above on the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_21">21&#160;</span>He brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the veil of the screen, and screened the ark of the covenant, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_22">22&#160;</span>He put the table in the Tent of Meeting, on the north side of the tabernacle, outside of the veil. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_23">23&#160;</span>He set the bread in order on it before Yahweh, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_24">24&#160;</span>He put the lamp stand in the Tent of Meeting, opposite the table, on the south side of the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_25">25&#160;</span>He lit the lamps before Yahweh, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_26">26&#160;</span>He put the golden altar in the Tent of Meeting before the veil; 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_27">27&#160;</span>and he burned incense of sweet spices on it, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_28">28&#160;</span>He put up the screen of the door to the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_29">29&#160;</span>He set the altar of burnt offering at the door of the tabernacle of the Tent of Meeting, and offered on it the burnt offering and the meal offering, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_30">30&#160;</span>He set the basin between the Tent of Meeting and the altar, and put water therein, with which to wash. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_31">31&#160;</span>Moses, Aaron, and his sons washed their hands and their feet there. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_32">32&#160;</span>When they went into the Tent of Meeting, and when they came near to the altar, they washed, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_33">33&#160;</span>He raised up the court around the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the court. So Moses finished the work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="EX40_34">34&#160;</span>Then the cloud covered the Tent of Meeting, and Yahweh’s glory filled the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_35">35&#160;</span>Moses wasn’t able to enter into the Tent of Meeting, because the cloud stayed on it, and Yahweh’s glory filled the tabernacle. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_36">36&#160;</span>When the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel went onward, throughout all their journeys; 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_37">37&#160;</span>but if the cloud wasn’t taken up, then they didn’t travel until the day that it was taken up. 
<span class="verse" id="EX40_38">38&#160;</span>For the cloud of Yahweh was on the tabernacle by day, and there was fire in the cloud by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:9</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX1_17"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:10</a>
 <span class="ft">“Moses” sounds like the Hebrew for “draw out”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX2_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:22</a>
 <span class="ft">“Gershom” sounds like the Hebrew for “an alien there”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:2</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:10</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “Lord” is “Adonai”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX10_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:19</a>
 <span class="ft">“Red Sea” is the translation for the Hebrew “Yam Suf”, which could be more literally translated “Sea of Reeds” or “Sea of Cattails”. It refers to the body of water currently known as the Red Sea, or possibly to one of the bodies of water connected to it or near it.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX14_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:8</a>
 <span class="ft">or, defiantly.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX15_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:23</a>
 <span class="ft">Marah means bitter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:16</a>
 <span class="ft">An omer is about 2.2 liters or about 2.3 quarts</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_31"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:31</a>
 <span class="ft">“Manna” means “What is it?”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX16_36"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16:36</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Massah means testing. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Meribah means quarreling.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX17_15"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:15</a>
 <span class="ft">Hebrew, Yahweh Nissi</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18:3</a>
 <span class="ft">“Gershom” sounds like the Hebrew for “an alien there”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX18_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18:4</a>
 <span class="ft">Eliezer means “God is my helper”. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:1</a>
 <span class="ft">After “God”, the Hebrew has the two letters “Aleph Tav” (the first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet), not as a word, but as a grammatical marker.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX20_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:7</a>
 <span class="ft">or, You shall not take the name of Yahweh your God in vain</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX21_32"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:32</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 30 shekels is about 300 grams or about 10.6 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX24_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:10</a>
 <span class="ft">or, lapis lazuli</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:5</a>
 <span class="ft">or, fine leather</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25:10</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX25_39"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 25:39</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX26_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26:2</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX27_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:1</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX27_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The altar was to be about 2.3×2.3×1.4 meters or about 7½×7½×4½ feet.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28:16</a>
 <span class="ft">A span is the length from the tip of a man’s thumb to the tip of his little finger when his hand is stretched out (about half a cubit, or 9 inches, or 22.8 cm.)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX28_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28:18</a>
 <span class="ft">or, lapis lazuli </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_40"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29:40</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX29_40"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29:40</a>
 <span class="ft">A hin is about 6.5 liters or 1.7 gallons, so a fourth of a hin is about 1.6 liters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30:2</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30:13</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 30:13</a>
 <span class="ft">a gerah is about 0.5 grams or about 7.7 grains</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_15"><span class="notemark">§</span> 30:15</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_23"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30:23</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 500 shekels is about 5 kilograms or about 11 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX30_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30:24</a>
 <span class="ft">A hin is about 6.5 liters or 1.7 gallons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX32_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX36_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 37:1</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX37_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 37:24</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38:1</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38:24</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 38:24</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.32 Troy ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_25"><span class="notemark">§</span> 38:25</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38:25</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38:26</a>
 <span class="ft">a beka is about 5 grams or about 0.175 ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_26"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 38:26</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_27"><span class="notemark">§</span> 38:27</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_28"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38:28</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 1775 shekels is about 17.75 kilograms or about 39 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38:29</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX38_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 38:29</a>
 <span class="ft">70 talents + 2400 shekels is about 2124 kilograms, or 2.124 metric tons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 39:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A span is the length from the tip of a man’s thumb to the tip of his little finger when his hand is stretched out (about half a cubit, or 9 inches, or 22.8 cm.)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#EX39_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 39:11</a>
 <span class="ft">or, lapis lazuli </span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
