<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Jeremiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Jeremiah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR51_0'>51</a></li>
<li><a href='JER.xhtml#JR52_0'>52</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JR0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Book of </div>
<div class='mt'>Jeremiah  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JR1_1">1&#160;</span>The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, one of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh’s<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> word came to him in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_3">3&#160;</span>It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the fifth month. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_4">4&#160;</span>Now Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_5">5&#160;</span>“Before I formed you in the womb, I knew you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Before you were born, I sanctified you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have appointed you a prophet to the nations.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_6">6&#160;</span>Then I said, “Ah, Lord<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Yahweh! Behold,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> I don’t know how to speak; for I am a child.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_7">7&#160;</span>But Yahweh said to me, “Don’t say, ‘I am a child;’ for you must go to whomever I send you, and you must say whatever I command you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid because of them, for I am with you to rescue you,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_9">9&#160;</span>Then Yahweh stretched out his hand and touched my mouth. Then Yahweh said to me, “Behold, I have put my words in your mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, I have today set you over the nations and over the kingdoms, to uproot and to tear down, to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_11">11&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, “Jeremiah, what do you see?” </div>
<div class='p'>I said, “I see a branch of an almond tree.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_12">12&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to me, “You have seen well; for I watch over my word to perform it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to me the second time, saying, “What do you see?” </div>
<div class='p'>I said, “I see a boiling cauldron; and it is tipping away from the north.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_14">14&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to me, “Out of the north, evil will break out on all the inhabitants of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_15">15&#160;</span>For behold, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>“They will come, and they will each set his throne at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='q2'>and against all its walls all around, and against all the cities of Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_16">16&#160;</span>I will utter my judgments against them concerning all their wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>in that they have forsaken me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have burned incense to other gods, </div>
<div class='q2'>and worshiped the works of their own hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR1_17">17&#160;</span>“You therefore put your belt on your waist, arise, and say to them all that I command you. Don’t be dismayed at them, lest I dismay you before them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_18">18&#160;</span>For behold, I have made you today a fortified city, an iron pillar, and bronze walls against the whole land—against the kings of Judah, against its princes, against its priests, and against the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR1_19">19&#160;</span>They will fight against you, but they will not prevail against you; for I am with you”, says Yahweh, “to rescue you.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_2">2&#160;</span>“Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, ‘Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“I remember for you the kindness of your youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>your love as a bride, </div>
<div class='q'>how you went after me in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>in a land that was not sown. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_3">3&#160;</span>Israel was holiness to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>the first fruits of his increase. </div>
<div class='q'>All who devour him will be held guilty. </div>
<div class='q2'>Evil will come on them,” ’ says Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_4">4&#160;</span>Hear Yahweh’s word, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel! 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“What unrighteousness have your fathers found in me, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they have gone far from me, </div>
<div class='q'>and have walked after worthless vanity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have become worthless? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_6">6&#160;</span>They didn’t say, ‘Where is Yahweh who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, </div>
<div class='q2'>who led us through the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>through a land of deserts and of pits, </div>
<div class='q2'>through a land of drought and of the shadow of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>through a land that no one passed through, </div>
<div class='q2'>and where no man lived?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_7">7&#160;</span>I brought you into a plentiful land </div>
<div class='q2'>to eat its fruit and its goodness; </div>
<div class='q'>but when you entered, you defiled my land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made my heritage an abomination. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_8">8&#160;</span>The priests didn’t say, ‘Where is Yahweh?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who handle the law didn’t know me. </div>
<div class='q'>The rulers also transgressed against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the prophets prophesied by Baal </div>
<div class='q2'>and followed things that do not profit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_9">9&#160;</span>“Therefore I will yet contend with you,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“and I will contend with your children’s children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_10">10&#160;</span>For pass over to the islands of Kittim, and see. </div>
<div class='q2'>Send to Kedar, and consider diligently, </div>
<div class='q2'>and see if there has been such a thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_11">11&#160;</span>Has a nation changed its gods, </div>
<div class='q2'>which really are no gods? </div>
<div class='q2'>But my people have changed their glory for that which doesn’t profit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_12">12&#160;</span>“Be astonished, you heavens, at this </div>
<div class='q2'>and be horribly afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be very desolate,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_13">13&#160;</span>“For my people have committed two evils: </div>
<div class='q2'>they have forsaken me, the spring of living waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cut out cisterns for themselves: broken cisterns that can’t hold water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_14">14&#160;</span>Is Israel a slave? </div>
<div class='q2'>Is he born into slavery? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why has he become a captive? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_15">15&#160;</span>The young lions have roared at him and raised their voices. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have made his land waste. </div>
<div class='q2'>His cities are burned up, without inhabitant. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_16">16&#160;</span>The children also of Memphis and Tahpanhes have broken the crown of your head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_17">17&#160;</span>“Haven’t you brought this on yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>in that you have forsaken Yahweh your God,<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> when he led you by the way? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_18">18&#160;</span>Now what do you gain by going to Egypt, to drink the waters of the Shihor? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or why do you to go on the way to Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_19">19&#160;</span>“Your own wickedness will correct you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your backsliding will rebuke you. </div>
<div class='q'>Know therefore and see that it is an evil and bitter thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you have forsaken Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that my fear is not in you,” says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_20">20&#160;</span>“For long ago I broke off your yoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>and burst your bonds. </div>
<div class='q'>You said, ‘I will not serve;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>for on every high hill and under every green tree you bowed yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>playing the prostitute. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_21">21&#160;</span>Yet I had planted you a noble vine, </div>
<div class='q2'>a pure and faithful seed. </div>
<div class='q2'>How then have you turned into the degenerate branches of a foreign vine to me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_22">22&#160;</span>For though you wash yourself with lye, </div>
<div class='q2'>and use much soap, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet your iniquity is marked before me,” says the Lord Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_23">23&#160;</span>“How can you say, ‘I am not defiled. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have not gone after the Baals’? </div>
<div class='q'>See your way in the valley. </div>
<div class='q2'>Know what you have done. </div>
<div class='q'>You are a swift dromedary traversing her ways, 
<span class="verse" id="JR2_24">24&#160;</span>a wild donkey used to the wilderness, that sniffs the wind in her craving. </div>
<div class='q2'>When she is in heat, who can turn her away? </div>
<div class='q2'>All those who seek her will not weary themselves. In her month, they will find her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_25">25&#160;</span>“Keep your feet from being bare, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your throat from thirst. </div>
<div class='q'>But you said, ‘It is in vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>No, for I have loved strangers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will go after them.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_26">26&#160;</span>As the thief is ashamed when he is found, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the house of Israel is ashamed— </div>
<div class='q2'>they, their kings, their princes, their priests, and their prophets, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_27">27&#160;</span>who tell wood, ‘You are my father,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and a stone, ‘You have given birth to me,’ </div>
<div class='q'>for they have turned their back to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not their face, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in the time of their trouble they will say, ‘Arise, and save us!’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_28">28&#160;</span>“But where are your gods that you have made for yourselves? </div>
<div class='q2'>Let them arise, if they can save you in the time of your trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have as many gods as you have towns, O Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_29">29&#160;</span>“Why will you contend with me? </div>
<div class='q2'>You all have transgressed against me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_30">30&#160;</span>“I have struck your children in vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>They received no correction. </div>
<div class='q'>Your own sword has devoured your prophets, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a destroying lion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_31">31&#160;</span>Generation, consider Yahweh’s word. </div>
<div class='q2'>Have I been a wilderness to Israel? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or a land of thick darkness? </div>
<div class='q'>Why do my people say, ‘We have broken loose. </div>
<div class='q2'>We will come to you no more’? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_32">32&#160;</span>“Can a virgin forget her ornaments, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a bride her attire? </div>
<div class='q2'>Yet my people have forgotten me for days without number. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_33">33&#160;</span>How well you prepare your way to seek love! </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore you have even taught the wicked women your ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_34">34&#160;</span>Also the blood of the souls of the innocent poor is found in your skirts. </div>
<div class='q2'>You didn’t find them breaking in, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is because of all these things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_35">35&#160;</span>“Yet you said, ‘I am innocent. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely his anger has turned away from me.’ </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will judge you, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you say, ‘I have not sinned.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_36">36&#160;</span>Why do you go about so much to change your ways? </div>
<div class='q2'>You will be ashamed of Egypt also, </div>
<div class='q2'>as you were ashamed of Assyria. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR2_37">37&#160;</span>You will also leave that place with your hands on your head; </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has rejected those in whom you trust, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you won’t prosper with them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_1">1&#160;</span>“They say, ‘If a man puts away his wife, and she goes from him, and becomes another man’s, should he return to her again?’ Wouldn’t that land be greatly polluted? But you have played the prostitute with many lovers; yet return again to me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_2">2&#160;</span>“Lift up your eyes to the bare heights, and see! Where have you not been lain with? You have sat waiting for them by the road, as an Arabian in the wilderness. You have polluted the land with your prostitution and with your wickedness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore the showers have been withheld and there has been no latter rain; yet you have had a prostitute’s forehead and you refused to be ashamed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_4">4&#160;</span>Will you not from this time cry to me, ‘My Father, you are the guide of my youth!’? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_5">5&#160;</span>“ ‘Will he retain his anger forever? Will he keep it to the end?’ Behold, you have spoken and have done evil things, and have had your way.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_6">6&#160;</span>Moreover, Yahweh said to me in the days of Josiah the king, “Have you seen that which backsliding Israel has done? She has gone up on every high mountain and under every green tree, and has played the prostitute there. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_7">7&#160;</span>I said after she had done all these things, ‘She will return to me;’ but she didn’t return, and her treacherous sister Judah saw it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_8">8&#160;</span>I saw when, for this very cause, that backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a certificate of divorce, yet treacherous Judah, her sister, had no fear, but she also went and played the prostitute. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_9">9&#160;</span>Because she took her prostitution lightly, the land was polluted, and she committed adultery with stones and with wood. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_10">10&#160;</span>Yet for all this her treacherous sister, Judah, has not returned to me with her whole heart, but only in pretense,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “Backsliding Israel has shown herself more righteous than treacherous Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_12">12&#160;</span>Go, and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, ‘Return, you backsliding Israel,’ says Yahweh; ‘I will not look in anger on you, for I am merciful,’ says Yahweh. ‘I will not keep anger forever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_13">13&#160;</span>Only acknowledge your iniquity, that you have transgressed against Yahweh your God, and have scattered your ways to the strangers under every green tree, and you have not obeyed my voice,’ ” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_14">14&#160;</span>“Return, backsliding children,” says Yahweh, “for I am a husband to you. I will take one of you from a city, and two from a family, and I will bring you to Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_15">15&#160;</span>I will give you shepherds according to my heart, who will feed you with knowledge and understanding. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_16">16&#160;</span>It will come to pass, when you are multiplied and increased in the land in those days,” says Yahweh, “they will no longer say, ‘the ark of Yahweh’s covenant!’ It will not come to mind. They won’t remember it. They won’t miss it, nor will another be made. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_17">17&#160;</span>At that time they will call Jerusalem ‘Yahweh’s Throne;’ and all the nations will be gathered to it, to Yahweh’s name, to Jerusalem. They will no longer walk after the stubbornness of their evil heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_18">18&#160;</span>In those days the house of Judah will walk with the house of Israel, and they will come together out of the land of the north to the land that I gave for an inheritance to your fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_19">19&#160;</span>“But I said, ‘How I desire to put you among the children, and give you a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the armies of the nations!’ and I said, ‘You shall call me “My Father”, and shall not turn away from following me.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR3_20">20&#160;</span>“Surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so you have dealt treacherously with me, house of Israel,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_21">21&#160;</span>A voice is heard on the bare heights, the weeping and the petitions of the children of Israel; because they have perverted their way, they have forgotten Yahweh their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_22">22&#160;</span>Return, you backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding. </div>
<div class='p'>“Behold, we have come to you; for you are Yahweh our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_23">23&#160;</span>Truly help from the hills, the tumult on the mountains, is in vain. Truly the salvation of Israel is in Yahweh our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_24">24&#160;</span>But the shameful thing has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth, their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="JR3_25">25&#160;</span>Let us lie down in our shame, and let our confusion cover us; for we have sinned against Yahweh our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even to this day. We have not obeyed Yahweh our God’s voice.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_1">1&#160;</span>“If you will return, Israel,” says Yahweh, “if you will return to me, and if you will put away your abominations out of my sight; then you will not be removed; 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_2">2&#160;</span>and you will swear, ‘As Yahweh lives,’ in truth, in justice, and in righteousness. The nations will bless themselves in him, and they will glory in him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_3">3&#160;</span>For Yahweh says to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem, “Break up your fallow ground, and don’t sow among thorns. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_4">4&#160;</span>Circumcise yourselves to Yahweh, and take away the foreskins of your heart, you men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem; lest my wrath go out like fire, and burn so that no one can quench it, because of the evil of your doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_5">5&#160;</span>Declare in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, ‘Blow the trumpet in the land!’ Cry aloud and say, ‘Assemble yourselves! Let’s go into the fortified cities!’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_6">6&#160;</span>Set up a standard toward Zion. Flee for safety! Don’t wait; for I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_7">7&#160;</span>A lion has gone up from his thicket, and a destroyer of nations. He is on his way. He has gone out from his place, to make your land desolate, that your cities be laid waste, without inhabitant. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_8">8&#160;</span>For this, clothe yourself with sackcloth, lament and wail; for the fierce anger of Yahweh hasn’t turned back from us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_9">9&#160;</span>“It will happen at that day,” says Yahweh, “that the heart of the king will perish, along with the heart of the princes. The priests will be astonished, and the prophets will wonder.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_10">10&#160;</span>Then I said, “Ah, Lord Yahweh! Surely you have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You will have peace;’ whereas the sword reaches to the heart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_11">11&#160;</span>At that time it will be said to this people and to Jerusalem, “A hot wind blows from the bare heights in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to winnow, nor to cleanse. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_12">12&#160;</span>A full wind from these will come for me. Now I will also utter judgments against them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, he will come up as clouds, and his chariots will be as the whirlwind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us! For we are ruined. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_14">14&#160;</span>Jerusalem, wash your heart from wickedness, that you may be saved. How long will your evil thoughts lodge within you? 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_15">15&#160;</span>For a voice declares from Dan, and publishes evil from the hills of Ephraim: 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_16">16&#160;</span>“Tell the nations, behold, publish against Jerusalem, ‘Watchers come from a far country, and raise their voice against the cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_17">17&#160;</span>As keepers of a field, they are against her all around, because she has been rebellious against me,’ ” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_18">18&#160;</span>“Your way and your doings have brought these things to you. This is your wickedness, for it is bitter, for it reaches to your heart.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_19">19&#160;</span>My anguish, my anguish! I am pained at my very heart! My heart trembles within me. I can’t hold my peace, because you have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_20">20&#160;</span>Destruction on destruction is decreed, for the whole land is laid waste. Suddenly my tents are destroyed, and my curtains gone in a moment. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_21">21&#160;</span>How long will I see the standard and hear the sound of the trumpet? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_22">22&#160;</span>“For my people are foolish. They don’t know me. They are foolish children, and they have no understanding. They are skillful in doing evil, but they don’t know how to do good.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_23">23&#160;</span>I saw the earth and, behold, it was waste and void, and the heavens, and they had no light. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_24">24&#160;</span>I saw the mountains, and behold, they trembled, and all the hills moved back and forth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_25">25&#160;</span>I saw, and behold, there was no man, and all the birds of the sky had fled. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_26">26&#160;</span>I saw, and behold, the fruitful field was a wilderness, and all its cities were broken down at the presence of Yahweh, before his fierce anger. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_27">27&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “The whole land will be a desolation; yet I will not make a full end. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_28">28&#160;</span>For this the earth will mourn, and the heavens above be black, because I have spoken it. I have planned it, and I have not repented, neither will I turn back from it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR4_29">29&#160;</span>Every city flees for the noise of the horsemen and archers. They go into the thickets and climb up on the rocks. Every city is forsaken, and not a man dwells therein. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_30">30&#160;</span>You, when you are made desolate, what will you do? Though you clothe yourself with scarlet, though you deck yourself with ornaments of gold, though you enlarge your eyes with makeup, you make yourself beautiful in vain. Your lovers despise you. They seek your life. 
<span class="verse" id="JR4_31">31&#160;</span>For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, the anguish as of her who gives birth to her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, who gasps for breath, who spreads her hands, saying, “Woe is me now! For my soul faints before the murderers.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_1">1&#160;</span>“Run back and forth through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in its wide places, if you can find a man, if there is anyone who does justly, who seeks truth, then I will pardon her. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_2">2&#160;</span>Though they say, ‘As Yahweh lives,’ surely they swear falsely.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_3">3&#160;</span>O Yahweh, don’t your eyes look on truth? You have stricken them, but they were not grieved. You have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have made their faces harder than a rock. They have refused to return. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_4">4&#160;</span>Then I said, “Surely these are poor. They are foolish; for they don’t know Yahweh’s way, nor the law of their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_5">5&#160;</span>I will go to the great men and will speak to them, for they know the way of Yahweh, and the law of their God.” But these with one accord have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore a lion out of the forest will kill them. A wolf of the evenings will destroy them. A leopard will watch against their cities. Everyone who goes out there will be torn in pieces, because their transgressions are many and their backsliding has increased. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_7">7&#160;</span>“How can I pardon you? Your children have forsaken me, and sworn by what are no gods. When I had fed them to the full, they committed adultery, and assembled themselves in troops at the prostitutes’ houses. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_8">8&#160;</span>They were as fed horses roaming at large. Everyone neighed after his neighbor’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_9">9&#160;</span>Shouldn’t I punish them for these things?” says Yahweh. “Shouldn’t my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_10">10&#160;</span>“Go up on her walls, and destroy, but don’t make a full end. Take away her branches, for they are not Yahweh’s. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_11">11&#160;</span>For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_12">12&#160;</span>They have denied Yahweh, and said, “It is not he. Evil won’t come on us. We won’t see sword or famine. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_13">13&#160;</span>The prophets will become wind, and the word is not in them. Thus it will be done to them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh, the God of Armies says, “Because you speak this word, behold, I will make my words in your mouth fire, and this people wood, and it will devour them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, I will bring a nation on you from far away, house of Israel,” says Yahweh. “It is a mighty nation. It is an ancient nation, a nation whose language you don’t know and don’t understand what they say. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_16">16&#160;</span>Their quiver is an open tomb. They are all mighty men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_17">17&#160;</span>They will eat up your harvest and your bread, which your sons and your daughters should eat. They will eat up your flocks and your herds. They will eat up your vines and your fig trees. They will beat down your fortified cities in which you trust with the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_18">18&#160;</span>“But even in those days,” says Yahweh, “I will not make a full end of you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_19">19&#160;</span>It will happen when you say, ‘Why has Yahweh our God done all these things to us?’ Then you shall say to them, ‘Just as you have forsaken me and served foreign gods in your land, so you will serve strangers in a land that is not yours.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_20">20&#160;</span>“Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_21">21&#160;</span>‘Hear this now, foolish people without understanding, who have eyes, and don’t see, who have ears, and don’t hear: 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t you fear me?’ says Yahweh ‘Won’t you tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it can’t pass it? Though its waves toss themselves, yet they can’t prevail. Though they roar, they still can’t pass over it.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_23">23&#160;</span>“But this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart. They have revolted and gone. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_24">24&#160;</span>They don’t say in their heart, ‘Let’s now fear Yahweh our God, who gives rain, both the former and the latter, in its season, who preserves to us the appointed weeks of the harvest.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_25">25&#160;</span>“Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withheld good from you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_26">26&#160;</span>For wicked men are found among my people. They watch, as fowlers lie in wait. They set a trap. They catch men. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_27">27&#160;</span>As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit. Therefore they have become great, and grew rich. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_28">28&#160;</span>They have grown fat. They shine; yes, they excel in deeds of wickedness. They don’t plead the cause, the cause of the fatherless, that they may prosper; and they don’t defend the rights of the needy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_29">29&#160;</span>“Shouldn’t I punish for these things?” says Yahweh. “Shouldn’t my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR5_30">30&#160;</span>“An astonishing and horrible thing has happened in the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR5_31">31&#160;</span>The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests rule by their own authority; and my people love to have it so. What will you do in the end of it?  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_1">1&#160;</span>“Flee for safety, you children of Benjamin, out of the middle of Jerusalem! Blow the trumpet in Tekoa and raise up a signal on Beth Haccherem, for evil looks out from the north with a great destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_2">2&#160;</span>I will cut off the beautiful and delicate one, the daughter of Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_3">3&#160;</span>Shepherds with their flocks will come to her. They will pitch their tents against her all around. They will feed everyone in his place.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_4">4&#160;</span>“Prepare war against her! Arise! Let’s go up at noon. Woe to us! For the day declines, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_5">5&#160;</span>Arise! Let’s go up by night, and let’s destroy her palaces.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_6">6&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies said, “Cut down trees, and cast up a mound against Jerusalem. This is the city to be visited. She is filled with oppression within herself. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_7">7&#160;</span>As a well produces its waters, so she produces her wickedness. Violence and destruction is heard in her. Sickness and wounds are continually before me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_8">8&#160;</span>Be instructed, Jerusalem, lest my soul be alienated from you, lest I make you a desolation, an uninhabited land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says, “They will thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel like a vine. Turn again your hand as a grape gatherer into the baskets.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_10">10&#160;</span>To whom should I speak and testify, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they can’t listen. Behold, Yahweh’s word has become a reproach to them. They have no delight in it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore I am full of Yahweh’s wrath. I am weary with holding it in. </div>
<div class='q'>“Pour it out on the children in the street, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on the assembly of young men together; </div>
<div class='q'>for even the husband with the wife will be taken, </div>
<div class='q2'>the aged with him who is full of days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_12">12&#160;</span>Their houses will be turned to others, </div>
<div class='q2'>their fields and their wives together; </div>
<div class='q'>for I will stretch out my hand on the inhabitants of the land, says Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_13">13&#160;</span>“For from their least even to their greatest, everyone is given to covetousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>From the prophet even to the priest, everyone deals falsely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_14">14&#160;</span>They have healed also the hurt of my people superficially, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘Peace, peace!’ when there is no peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_15">15&#160;</span>Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? </div>
<div class='q2'>No, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore they will fall among those who fall. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I visit them, they will be cast down,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the old paths, ‘Where is the good way?’ and walk in it, and you will find rest for your souls. But they said, ‘We will not walk in it.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_17">17&#160;</span>I set watchmen over you, saying, ‘Listen to the sound of the trumpet!’ But they said, ‘We will not listen!’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_18">18&#160;</span>Therefore hear, you nations, and know, congregation, what is among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_19">19&#160;</span>Hear, earth! Behold, I will bring evil on this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not listened to my words; and as for my law, they have rejected it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_20">20&#160;</span>To what purpose does frankincense from Sheba come to me, and the sweet cane from a far country? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable, and your sacrifices are not pleasing to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says, “Behold, I will lay stumbling blocks before this people. The fathers and the sons together will stumble against them. The neighbor and his friend will perish.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Behold, a people comes from the north country. A great nation will be stirred up from the uttermost parts of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_23">23&#160;</span>They take hold of bow and spear. They are cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride on horses, everyone set in array, as a man to the battle, against you, daughter of Zion.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_24">24&#160;</span>We have heard its report. Our hands become feeble. Anguish has taken hold of us, and pains as of a woman in labor. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t go out into the field or walk by the way; for the sword of the enemy and terror are on every side. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_26">26&#160;</span>Daughter of my people, clothe yourself with sackcloth, and wallow in ashes! Mourn, as for an only son, most bitter lamentation, for the destroyer will suddenly come on us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR6_27">27&#160;</span>“I have made you a tester of metals and a fortress among my people, that you may know and try their way. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_28">28&#160;</span>They are all grievous rebels, going around to slander. They are bronze and iron. All of them deal corruptly. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_29">29&#160;</span>The bellows blow fiercely. The lead is consumed in the fire. In vain they go on refining, for the wicked are not plucked away. 
<span class="verse" id="JR6_30">30&#160;</span>Men will call them rejected silver, because Yahweh has rejected them.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_1">1&#160;</span>The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_2">2&#160;</span>“Stand in the gate of Yahweh’s house, and proclaim this word there, and say, ‘Hear Yahweh’s word, all you of Judah, who enter in at these gates to worship Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says, “Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t trust in lying words, saying, ‘Yahweh’s temple, Yahweh’s temple, Yahweh’s temple, are these.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_5">5&#160;</span>For if you thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if you thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbor; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_6">6&#160;</span>if you don’t oppress the foreigner, the fatherless, and the widow, and don’t shed innocent blood in this place, and don’t walk after other gods to your own hurt, 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_7">7&#160;</span>then I will cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers, from of old even forever more. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_8">8&#160;</span>Behold, you trust in lying words that can’t profit. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_9">9&#160;</span>Will you steal, murder, commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense to Baal, and walk after other gods that you have not known, 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_10">10&#160;</span>then come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, ‘We are delivered,’ that you may do all these abominations? 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_11">11&#160;</span>Has this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I myself have seen it,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_12">12&#160;</span>“But go now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_13">13&#160;</span>Now, because you have done all these works,” says Yahweh, “and I spoke to you, rising up early and speaking, but you didn’t hear; and I called you, but you didn’t answer; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_14">14&#160;</span>therefore I will do to the house which is called by my name, in which you trust, and to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_15">15&#160;</span>I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brothers, even the whole offspring<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of Ephraim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_16">16&#160;</span>“Therefore don’t pray for this people. Don’t lift up a cry or prayer for them or make intercession to me; for I will not hear you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t you see what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_18">18&#160;</span>The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of the sky, and to pour out drink offerings to other gods, that they may provoke me to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_19">19&#160;</span>Do they provoke me to anger?” says Yahweh. “Don’t they provoke themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord Yahweh says: “Behold, my anger and my wrath will be poured out on this place, on man, on animal, on the trees of the field, and on the fruit of the ground; and it will burn and will not be quenched.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: “Add your burnt offerings to your sacrifices and eat meat. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_22">22&#160;</span>For I didn’t speak to your fathers or command them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices; 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_23">23&#160;</span>but this thing I commanded them, saying, ‘Listen to my voice, and I will be your God, and you shall be my people. Walk in all the way that I command you, that it may be well with you.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_24">24&#160;</span>But they didn’t listen or turn their ear, but walked in their own counsels and in the stubbornness of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_25">25&#160;</span>Since the day that your fathers came out of the land of Egypt to this day, I have sent to you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_26">26&#160;</span>Yet they didn’t listen to me or incline their ear, but made their neck stiff. They did worse than their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_27">27&#160;</span>“You shall speak all these words to them, but they will not listen to you. You shall also call to them, but they will not answer you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_28">28&#160;</span>You shall tell them, ‘This is the nation that has not listened to Yahweh their God’s voice, nor received instruction. Truth has perished, and is cut off from their mouth.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_29">29&#160;</span>Cut off your hair, and throw it away, and take up a lamentation on the bare heights; for Yahweh has rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR7_30">30&#160;</span>“For the children of Judah have done that which is evil in my sight,” says Yahweh. “They have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_31">31&#160;</span>They have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, which I didn’t command, nor did it come into my mind. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_32">32&#160;</span>Therefore behold, the days come”, says Yahweh, “that it will no more be called ‘Topheth’ or ‘The valley of the son of Hinnom’, but ‘The valley of Slaughter’; for they will bury in Topheth until there is no place to bury. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_33">33&#160;</span>The dead bodies of this people will be food for the birds of the sky, and for the animals of the earth. No one will frighten them away. 
<span class="verse" id="JR7_34">34&#160;</span>Then I will cause to cease from the cities of Judah and from the streets of Jerusalem the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride; for the land will become a waste.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_1">1&#160;</span>“At that time,” says Yahweh, “they will bring the bones of the kings of Judah, the bones of his princes, the bones of the priests, the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_2">2&#160;</span>They will spread them before the sun, the moon, and all the army of the sky, which they have loved, which they have served, after which they have walked, which they have sought, and which they have worshiped. They will not be gathered or be buried. They will be like dung on the surface of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_3">3&#160;</span>Death will be chosen rather than life by all the residue that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the places where I have driven them,” says Yahweh of Armies. 
<span class="verse" id="JR8_4">4&#160;</span>“Moreover you shall tell them, ‘Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘Do men fall, and not rise up again? </div>
<div class='q2'>Does one turn away, and not return? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_5">5&#160;</span>Why then have the people of Jerusalem fallen back by a perpetual backsliding? </div>
<div class='q2'>They cling to deceit. </div>
<div class='q2'>They refuse to return. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_6">6&#160;</span>I listened and heard, but they didn’t say what is right. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one repents of his wickedness, saying, “What have I done?” </div>
<div class='q'>Everyone turns to his course, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a horse that rushes headlong in the battle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_7">7&#160;</span>Yes, the stork in the sky knows her appointed times. </div>
<div class='q2'>The turtledove, the swallow, and the crane observe the time of their coming; </div>
<div class='q2'>but my people don’t know Yahweh’s law. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘How do you say, “We are wise, and Yahweh’s law is with us?” </div>
<div class='q2'>But, behold, the false pen of the scribes has made that a lie. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_9">9&#160;</span>The wise men are disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are dismayed and trapped. </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, they have rejected Yahweh’s word. </div>
<div class='q2'>What kind of wisdom is in them? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore I will give their wives to others </div>
<div class='q2'>and their fields to those who will possess them. </div>
<div class='q'>For everyone from the least even to the greatest is given to covetousness; </div>
<div class='q2'>from the prophet even to the priest everyone deals falsely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_11">11&#160;</span>They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Peace, peace,” when there is no peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_12">12&#160;</span>Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? </div>
<div class='q2'>No, they were not at all ashamed. </div>
<div class='q2'>They couldn’t blush. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore they will fall among those who fall. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the time of their visitation they will be cast down, says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘I will utterly consume them, says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>No grapes will be on the vine, </div>
<div class='q2'>no figs on the fig tree, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the leaf will fade. </div>
<div class='q'>The things that I have given them </div>
<div class='q2'>will pass away from them.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_14">14&#160;</span>“Why do we sit still? </div>
<div class='q2'>Assemble yourselves! </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s enter into the fortified cities, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let’s be silent there; </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh our God has put us to silence, </div>
<div class='q2'>and given us poisoned water to drink, </div>
<div class='q2'>because we have sinned against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_15">15&#160;</span>We looked for peace, but no good came; </div>
<div class='q2'>and for a time of healing, and behold, dismay! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_16">16&#160;</span>The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan. </div>
<div class='q2'>The whole land trembles at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones; </div>
<div class='q'>for they have come, and have devoured the land and all that is in it, </div>
<div class='q2'>the city and those who dwell therein.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_17">17&#160;</span>“For, behold, I will send serpents, </div>
<div class='q2'>adders among you, </div>
<div class='q2'>which will not be charmed; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will bite you,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_18">18&#160;</span>Oh that I could comfort myself against sorrow! </div>
<div class='q2'>My heart is faint within me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people from a land that is very far off: </div>
<div class='q2'>“Isn’t Yahweh in Zion? </div>
<div class='q2'>Isn’t her King in her?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“Why have they provoked me to anger with their engraved images, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with foreign idols?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_20">20&#160;</span>“The harvest is past. </div>
<div class='q2'>The summer has ended, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we are not saved.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_21">21&#160;</span>For the hurt of the daughter of my people, I am hurt. </div>
<div class='q2'>I mourn. </div>
<div class='q2'>Dismay has taken hold of me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR8_22">22&#160;</span>Is there no balm in Gilead? </div>
<div class='q2'>Is there no physician there? </div>
<div class='q'>Why then isn’t the health of the daughter of my people recovered?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JR9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_1">1&#160;</span>Oh that my head were waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my eyes a spring of tears, </div>
<div class='q'>that I might weep day and night </div>
<div class='q2'>for the slain of the daughter of my people! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_2">2&#160;</span>Oh that I had in the wilderness </div>
<div class='q2'>a lodging place of wayfaring men, </div>
<div class='q'>that I might leave my people </div>
<div class='q2'>and go from them! </div>
<div class='q'>For they are all adulterers, </div>
<div class='q2'>an assembly of treacherous men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_3">3&#160;</span>“They bend their tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>as their bow, for falsehood. </div>
<div class='q'>They have grown strong in the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>but not for truth; </div>
<div class='q'>for they proceed from evil to evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they don’t know me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_4">4&#160;</span>“Everyone beware of his neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t trust in any brother; </div>
<div class='q'>for every brother will utterly supplant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every neighbor will go around like a slanderer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_5">5&#160;</span>Friends deceive each other, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will not speak the truth. </div>
<div class='q'>They have taught their tongue to speak lies. </div>
<div class='q2'>They weary themselves committing iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_6">6&#160;</span>Your habitation is in the middle of deceit. </div>
<div class='q2'>Through deceit, they refuse to know me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh of Armies says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will melt them and test them; </div>
<div class='q2'>for how should I deal with the daughter of my people? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_8">8&#160;</span>Their tongue is a deadly arrow. </div>
<div class='q2'>It speaks deceit. </div>
<div class='q'>One speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in his heart, he waits to ambush him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_9">9&#160;</span>Shouldn’t I punish them for these things?” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Shouldn’t my soul be avenged on a nation such as this? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_10">10&#160;</span>I will weep and wail for the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lament for the pastures of the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q'>because they are burned up, so that no one passes through; </div>
<div class='q2'>Men can’t hear the voice of the livestock. </div>
<div class='q'>Both the birds of the sky and the animals have fled. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are gone. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_11">11&#160;</span>“I will make Jerusalem heaps, </div>
<div class='q2'>a dwelling place of jackals. </div>
<div class='q'>I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>without inhabitant.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_12">12&#160;</span>Who is wise enough to understand this? Who is he to whom the mouth of Yahweh has spoken, that he may declare it? Why has the land perished and burned up like a wilderness, so that no one passes through? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice or walked in my ways, 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_14">14&#160;</span>but have walked after the stubbornness of their own heart and after the Baals, which their fathers taught them.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, “Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood and give them poisoned water to drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_16">16&#160;</span>I will scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known. I will send the sword after them, until I have consumed them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Consider, and call for the mourning women, that they may come. </div>
<div class='q2'>Send for the skillful women, that they may come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_18">18&#160;</span>Let them make haste </div>
<div class='q2'>and take up a wailing for us, </div>
<div class='q'>that our eyes may run down with tears </div>
<div class='q2'>and our eyelids gush out with waters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_19">19&#160;</span>For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘How we are ruined! </div>
<div class='q'>We are greatly confounded </div>
<div class='q2'>because we have forsaken the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they have cast down our dwellings.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_20">20&#160;</span>Yet hear Yahweh’s word, you women. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your ear receive the word of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>Teach your daughters wailing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone teach her neighbor a lamentation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_21">21&#160;</span>For death has come up into our windows. </div>
<div class='q2'>It has entered into our palaces </div>
<div class='q'>to cut off the children from outside, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the young men from the streets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_22">22&#160;</span>Speak, “Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘The dead bodies of men will fall as dung on the open field, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the handful after the harvester. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will gather them.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Don’t let the wise man glory in his wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let the mighty man glory in his might. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let the rich man glory in his riches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_24">24&#160;</span>But let him who glories glory in this, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he has understanding, and knows me, </div>
<div class='q'>that I am Yahweh who exercises loving kindness, justice, and righteousness in the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I delight in these things,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR9_25">25&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that I will punish all those who are circumcised only in their flesh: 
<span class="verse" id="JR9_26">26&#160;</span>Egypt, Judah, Edom, the children of Ammon, Moab, and all who have the corners of their hair cut off, who dwell in the wilderness, for all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_1">1&#160;</span>Hear the word which Yahweh speaks to you, house of Israel! 
<span class="verse" id="JR10_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Don’t learn the way of the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be dismayed at the signs of the sky; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the nations are dismayed at them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_3">3&#160;</span>For the customs of the peoples are vanity; </div>
<div class='q2'>for one cuts a tree out of the forest, </div>
<div class='q2'>the work of the hands of the workman with the ax. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_4">4&#160;</span>They deck it with silver and with gold. </div>
<div class='q2'>They fasten it with nails and with hammers, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that it can’t move. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_5">5&#160;</span>They are like a palm tree, of turned work, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t speak. </div>
<div class='q'>They must be carried, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they can’t move. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t be afraid of them; </div>
<div class='q2'>for they can’t do evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is it in them to do good.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_6">6&#160;</span>There is no one like you, Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are great, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your name is great in might. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_7">7&#160;</span>Who shouldn’t fear you, </div>
<div class='q2'>King of the nations? </div>
<div class='q2'>For it belongs to you. </div>
<div class='q'>Because among all the wise men of the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in all their royal estate, </div>
<div class='q2'>there is no one like you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_8">8&#160;</span>But they are together brutish and foolish, </div>
<div class='q2'>instructed by idols! </div>
<div class='q2'>It is just wood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_9">9&#160;</span>There is silver beaten into plates, which is brought from Tarshish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gold from Uphaz, </div>
<div class='q2'>the work of the engraver and of the hands of the goldsmith. </div>
<div class='q'>Their clothing is blue and purple. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are all the work of skillful men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_10">10&#160;</span>But Yahweh is the true God. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is the living God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an everlasting King. </div>
<div class='q'>At his wrath, the earth trembles. </div>
<div class='q2'>The nations aren’t able to withstand his indignation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_11">11&#160;</span>“You shall say this to them: ‘The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth will perish from the earth, and from under the heavens.’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_12">12&#160;</span>God has made the earth by his power. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has established the world by his wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by his understanding has he stretched out the heavens. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_13">13&#160;</span>When he utters his voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>the waters in the heavens roar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>He makes lightnings for the rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings the wind out of his treasuries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_14">14&#160;</span>Every man has become brutish and without knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>Every goldsmith is disappointed by his engraved image; </div>
<div class='q'>for his molten image is falsehood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no breath in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_15">15&#160;</span>They are vanity, a work of delusion. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the time of their visitation they will perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_16">16&#160;</span>The portion of Jacob is not like these; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he is the maker of all things; </div>
<div class='q'>and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_17">17&#160;</span>Gather up your wares out of the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who live under siege. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_18">18&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will distress them, that they may feel it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_19">19&#160;</span>Woe is me because of my injury! </div>
<div class='q2'>My wound is serious; </div>
<div class='q'>but I said, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Truly this is my grief, and I must bear it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_20">20&#160;</span>My tent has been destroyed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all my cords are broken. </div>
<div class='q'>My children have gone away from me, and they are no more. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no one to spread my tent any more, </div>
<div class='q2'>to set up my curtains. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_21">21&#160;</span>For the shepherds have become brutish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have not inquired of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore they have not prospered, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all their flocks have scattered. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_22">22&#160;</span>The voice of news, behold, it comes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a great commotion out of the north country, </div>
<div class='q'>to make the cities of Judah a desolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>a dwelling place of jackals. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh, I know that the way of man is not in himself. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is not in man who walks to direct his steps. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh, correct me, but gently; </div>
<div class='q2'>not in your anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you reduce me to nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR10_25">25&#160;</span>Pour out your wrath on the nations that don’t know you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on the families that don’t call on your name; </div>
<div class='q'>for they have devoured Jacob. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, they have devoured him, consumed him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have laid waste his habitation.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_1">1&#160;</span>The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_2">2&#160;</span>“Hear the words of this covenant, and speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_3">3&#160;</span>and say to them, Yahweh, the God of Israel says: ‘Cursed is the man who doesn’t hear the words of this covenant, 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_4">4&#160;</span>which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace,’ saying, ‘Obey my voice and do them, according to all which I command you; so you shall be my people, and I will be your God; 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_5">5&#160;</span>that I may establish the oath which I swore to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey,’ as it is today.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then I answered, and said, “Amen, Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, ‘Hear the words of this covenant, and do them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_7">7&#160;</span>For I earnestly protested to your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even to this day, rising early and protesting, saying, “Obey my voice.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_8">8&#160;</span>Yet they didn’t obey, nor turn their ear, but everyone walked in the stubbornness of their evil heart. Therefore I brought on them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do, but they didn’t do them.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_10">10&#160;</span>They have turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words. They have gone after other gods to serve them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will bring evil on them which they will not be able to escape; and they will cry to me, but I will not listen to them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_12">12&#160;</span>Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem will go and cry to the gods to which they offer incense, but they will not save them at all in the time of their trouble. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_13">13&#160;</span>For according to the number of your cities are your gods, Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem you have set up altars to the shameful thing, even altars to burn incense to Baal.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_14">14&#160;</span>“Therefore don’t pray for this people. Don’t lift up cry or prayer for them; for I will not hear them in the time that they cry to me because of their trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_15">15&#160;</span>What has my beloved to do in my house, </div>
<div class='q2'>since she has behaved lewdly with many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the holy flesh has passed from you? </div>
<div class='q'>When you do evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>then you rejoice.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh called your name, “A green olive tree, </div>
<div class='q2'>beautiful with goodly fruit.” </div>
<div class='q'>With the noise of a great roar he has kindled fire on it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its branches are broken. </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_17">17&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, who planted you, has pronounced evil against you, because of the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have done to themselves in provoking me to anger by offering incense to Baal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_18">18&#160;</span>Yahweh gave me knowledge of it, and I knew it. Then you showed me their doings. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_19">19&#160;</span>But I was like a gentle lamb that is led to the slaughter. I didn’t know that they had devised plans against me, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“Let’s destroy the tree with its fruit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let’s cut him off from the land of the living, </div>
<div class='q2'>that his name may be no more remembered.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_20">20&#160;</span>But, Yahweh of Armies, who judges righteously, </div>
<div class='q2'>who tests the heart and the mind, </div>
<div class='q'>I will see your vengeance on them; </div>
<div class='q2'>for to you I have revealed my cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR11_21">21&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh says concerning the men of Anathoth, who seek your life, saying, ‘You shall not prophesy in Yahweh’s name, that you not die by our hand’— 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_22">22&#160;</span>therefore Yahweh of Armies says, ‘Behold, I will punish them. The young men will die by the sword. Their sons and their daughters will die by famine. 
<span class="verse" id="JR11_23">23&#160;</span>There will be no remnant to them, for I will bring evil on the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.’ ”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JR12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_1">1&#160;</span>You are righteous, Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>when I contend with you; </div>
<div class='q'>yet I would like to plead a case with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Why does the way of the wicked prosper? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why are they all at ease who deal very treacherously? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_2">2&#160;</span>You have planted them. Yes, they have taken root. </div>
<div class='q2'>They grow. Yes, they produce fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>You are near in their mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and far from their heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_3">3&#160;</span>But you, Yahweh, know me. </div>
<div class='q2'>You see me, and test my heart toward you. </div>
<div class='q'>Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prepare them for the day of slaughter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_4">4&#160;</span>How long will the land mourn, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the herbs of the whole country wither? </div>
<div class='q'>Because of the wickedness of those who dwell therein, </div>
<div class='q2'>the animals and birds are consumed; </div>
<div class='q'>because they said, </div>
<div class='q2'>“He won’t see our latter end.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_5">5&#160;</span>“If you have run with the footmen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they have wearied you, </div>
<div class='q2'>then how can you contend with horses? </div>
<div class='q'>Though in a land of peace you are secure, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet how will you do in the pride of the Jordan? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_6">6&#160;</span>For even your brothers, and the house of your father, </div>
<div class='q2'>even they have dealt treacherously with you! </div>
<div class='q2'>Even they have cried aloud after you! </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t believe them, </div>
<div class='q2'>though they speak beautiful words to you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_7">7&#160;</span>“I have forsaken my house. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have cast off my heritage. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_8">8&#160;</span>My heritage has become to me as a lion in the forest. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has uttered her voice against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I have hated her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_9">9&#160;</span>Is my heritage to me as a speckled bird of prey? </div>
<div class='q2'>Are the birds of prey against her all around? </div>
<div class='q'>Go, assemble all the animals of the field. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bring them to devour. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_10">10&#160;</span>Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have trodden my portion under foot. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_11">11&#160;</span>They have made it a desolation. </div>
<div class='q2'>It mourns to me, being desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>The whole land is made desolate, </div>
<div class='q2'>because no one cares. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_12">12&#160;</span>Destroyers have come on all the bare heights in the wilderness; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the sword of Yahweh devours from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land. </div>
<div class='q2'>No flesh has peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_13">13&#160;</span>They have sown wheat, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have reaped thorns. </div>
<div class='q'>They have exhausted themselves, </div>
<div class='q2'>and profit nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be ashamed of your fruits, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of Yahweh’s fierce anger.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR12_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Concerning all my evil neighbors, who touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit: Behold, I will pluck them up from off their land, and will pluck up the house of Judah from among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_15">15&#160;</span>It will happen that after I have plucked them up, I will return and have compassion on them. I will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to his land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_16">16&#160;</span>It will happen, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, ‘As Yahweh lives;’ even as they taught my people to swear by Baal, then they will be built up in the middle of my people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR12_17">17&#160;</span>But if they will not hear, then I will pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it,” says Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “Go, and buy yourself a linen belt, and put it on your waist, and don’t put it in water.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_2">2&#160;</span>So I bought a belt according to Yahweh’s word, and put it on my waist. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to me the second time, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_4">4&#160;</span>“Take the belt that you have bought, which is on your waist, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of the rock.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_5">5&#160;</span>So I went and hid it by the Euphrates, as Yahweh commanded me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_6">6&#160;</span>After many days, Yahweh said to me, “Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take the belt from there, which I commanded you to hide there.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_7">7&#160;</span>Then I went to the Euphrates, and dug, and took the belt from the place where I had hidden it; and behold, the belt was ruined. It was profitable for nothing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_8">8&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_9">9&#160;</span>“Yahweh says, ‘In this way I will ruin the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_10">10&#160;</span>This evil people, who refuse to hear my words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and have gone after other gods to serve them and to worship them, will even be as this belt, which is profitable for nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_11">11&#160;</span>For as the belt clings to the waist of a man, so I have caused the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah to cling to me,’ says Yahweh; ‘that they may be to me for a people, for a name, for praise, and for glory; but they would not hear.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_12">12&#160;</span>“Therefore you shall speak to them this word: ‘Yahweh, the God of Israel says, “Every container should be filled with wine.” ’ They will tell you, ‘Do we not certainly know that every container should be filled with wine?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_13">13&#160;</span>Then tell them, ‘Yahweh says, “Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings who sit on David’s throne, the priests, the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness. 
<span class="verse" id="JR13_14">14&#160;</span>I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together,” says Yahweh: “I will not pity, spare, or have compassion, that I should not destroy them.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_15">15&#160;</span>Hear, and give ear. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be proud, </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has spoken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_16">16&#160;</span>Give glory to Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>before he causes darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and before your feet stumble on the dark mountains, </div>
<div class='q'>and while you look for light, </div>
<div class='q2'>he turns it into the shadow of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes it deep darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_17">17&#160;</span>But if you will not hear it, </div>
<div class='q2'>my soul will weep in secret for your pride. </div>
<div class='q'>My eye will weep bitterly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and run down with tears, </div>
<div class='q2'>because Yahweh’s flock has been taken captive. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_18">18&#160;</span>Say to the king and to the queen mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Humble yourselves. </div>
<div class='q'>Sit down, for your crowns have come down, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the crown of your glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_19">19&#160;</span>The cities of the South are shut up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no one to open them. </div>
<div class='q'>Judah is carried away captive: all of them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are wholly carried away captive. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_20">20&#160;</span>Lift up your eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and see those who come from the north. </div>
<div class='q'>Where is the flock that was given to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>your beautiful flock? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_21">21&#160;</span>What will you say when he sets over you as head those whom you have yourself taught to be friends to you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Won’t sorrows take hold of you, as of a woman in travail? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_22">22&#160;</span>If you say in your heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Why have these things come on me?” </div>
<div class='q'>Your skirts are uncovered because of the greatness of your iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your heels suffer violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_23">23&#160;</span>Can the Ethiopian change his skin, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the leopard his spots? </div>
<div class='q'>Then may you also do good, </div>
<div class='q2'>who are accustomed to do evil. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_24">24&#160;</span>“Therefore I will scatter them </div>
<div class='q2'>as the stubble that passes away </div>
<div class='q2'>by the wind of the wilderness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_25">25&#160;</span>This is your lot, </div>
<div class='q2'>the portion measured to you from me,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>“because you have forgotten me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and trusted in falsehood.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore I will also uncover your skirts on your face, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your shame will appear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR13_27">27&#160;</span>I have seen your abominations, even your adulteries </div>
<div class='q2'>and your neighing, the lewdness of your prostitution, </div>
<div class='q2'>on the hills in the field. </div>
<div class='q'>Woe to you, Jerusalem! </div>
<div class='q2'>You will not be made clean. </div>
<div class='q2'>How long will it yet be?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_1">1&#160;</span>This is Yahweh’s word that came to Jeremiah concerning the drought: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_2">2&#160;</span>“Judah mourns, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its gates languish. </div>
<div class='q'>They sit in black on the ground. </div>
<div class='q2'>The cry of Jerusalem goes up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_3">3&#160;</span>Their nobles send their little ones to the waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>They come to the cisterns, </div>
<div class='q2'>and find no water. </div>
<div class='q'>They return with their vessels empty. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are disappointed and confounded, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cover their heads. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_4">4&#160;</span>Because of the ground which is cracked, </div>
<div class='q2'>because no rain has been in the land, </div>
<div class='q'>the plowmen are disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>They cover their heads. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_5">5&#160;</span>Yes, the doe in the field also calves and forsakes her young, </div>
<div class='q2'>because there is no grass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_6">6&#160;</span>The wild donkeys stand on the bare heights. </div>
<div class='q2'>They pant for air like jackals. </div>
<div class='q'>Their eyes fail, </div>
<div class='q2'>because there is no vegetation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_7">7&#160;</span>Though our iniquities testify against us, </div>
<div class='q2'>work for your name’s sake, Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q'>for our rebellions are many. </div>
<div class='q2'>We have sinned against you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_8">8&#160;</span>You hope of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>its Savior in the time of trouble, </div>
<div class='q'>why should you be as a foreigner in the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a wayfaring man who turns aside to stay for a night? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_9">9&#160;</span>Why should you be like a scared man, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a mighty man who can’t save? </div>
<div class='q'>Yet you, Yahweh, are in the middle of us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we are called by your name. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t leave us. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh says to this people: </div>
<div class='q'>“Even so they have loved to wander. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have not restrained their feet. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore Yahweh does not accept them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Now he will remember their iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and punish them for their sins.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “Don’t pray for this people for their good. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_12">12&#160;</span>When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt offering and meal offering, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, by famine, and by pestilence.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_13">13&#160;</span>Then I said, “Ah, Lord Yahweh! Behold, the prophets tell them, ‘You will not see the sword, neither will you have famine; but I will give you assured peace in this place.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_14">14&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to me, “The prophets prophesy lies in my name. I didn’t send them. I didn’t command them. I didn’t speak to them. They prophesy to you a lying vision, divination, and a thing of nothing, and the deceit of their own heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says concerning the prophets who prophesy in my name, but I didn’t send them, yet they say, ‘Sword and famine will not be in this land.’ Those prophets will be consumed by sword and famine. 
<span class="verse" id="JR14_16">16&#160;</span>The people to whom they prophesy will be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword. They will have no one to bury them—them, their wives, their sons, or their daughters, for I will pour their wickedness on them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_17">17&#160;</span>“You shall say this word to them: </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘Let my eyes run down with tears night and day, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let them not cease; </div>
<div class='q'>for the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a very grievous wound. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_18">18&#160;</span>If I go out into the field, </div>
<div class='q2'>then behold, the slain with the sword! </div>
<div class='q'>If I enter into the city, </div>
<div class='q2'>then behold, those who are sick with famine! </div>
<div class='q'>For both the prophet and the priest go about in the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have no knowledge.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_19">19&#160;</span>Have you utterly rejected Judah? </div>
<div class='q2'>Has your soul loathed Zion? </div>
<div class='q'>Why have you struck us, and there is no healing for us? </div>
<div class='q2'>We looked for peace, but no good came; </div>
<div class='q2'>and for a time of healing, and behold, dismay! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_20">20&#160;</span>We acknowledge, Yahweh, our wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the iniquity of our fathers; </div>
<div class='q2'>for we have sinned against you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_21">21&#160;</span>Do not abhor us, for your name’s sake. </div>
<div class='q2'>Do not disgrace the throne of your glory. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember, and don’t break your covenant with us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR14_22">22&#160;</span>Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or can the sky give showers? </div>
<div class='q2'>Aren’t you he, Yahweh our God? </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore we will wait for you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have made all these things.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_1">1&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to me, “Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind would not turn toward this people. Cast them out of my sight, and let them go out! 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_2">2&#160;</span>It will happen when they ask you, ‘Where shall we go out?’ then you shall tell them, ‘Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Such as are for death, to death; </div>
<div class='q'>such as are for the sword, to the sword; </div>
<div class='q'>such as are for the famine, to the famine; </div>
<div class='q'>and such as are for captivity, to captivity.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_3">3&#160;</span>“I will appoint over them four kinds,” says Yahweh: “the sword to kill, the dogs to tear, the birds of the sky, and the animals of the earth, to devour and to destroy. 
<span class="verse" id="JR15_4">4&#160;</span>I will cause them to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_5">5&#160;</span>For who will have pity on you, Jerusalem? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will mourn you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will come to ask of your welfare? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_6">6&#160;</span>You have rejected me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“You have gone backward. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore I have stretched out my hand against you </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroyed you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am weary of showing compassion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_7">7&#160;</span>I have winnowed them with a fan in the gates of the land. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have bereaved them of children. </div>
<div class='q'>I have destroyed my people. </div>
<div class='q2'>They didn’t return from their ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_8">8&#160;</span>Their widows are increased more than the sand of the seas. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have brought on them against the mother of the young men a destroyer at noonday. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have caused anguish and terrors to fall on her suddenly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_9">9&#160;</span>She who has borne seven languishes. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has given up the spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>Her sun has gone down while it was yet day. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has been disappointed and confounded. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will deliver their residue to the sword before their enemies,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_10">10&#160;</span>Woe is me, my mother, that you have borne me, a man of strife, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a man of contention to the whole earth! </div>
<div class='q'>I have not lent, neither have men lent to me; </div>
<div class='q2'>yet every one of them curses me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh said, </div>
<div class='q'>“Most certainly I will strengthen you for good. </div>
<div class='q2'>Most certainly I will cause the enemy to make supplication to you in the time of evil </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the time of affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_12">12&#160;</span>Can one break iron, </div>
<div class='q2'>even iron from the north, and bronze? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_13">13&#160;</span>I will give your substance and your treasures for a plunder without price, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that for all your sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>even in all your borders. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_14">14&#160;</span>I will make them to pass with your enemies into a land which you don’t know; </div>
<div class='q2'>for a fire is kindled in my anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>which will burn on you.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh, you know. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember me, visit me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and avenge me of my persecutors. </div>
<div class='q'>You are patient, so don’t take me away. </div>
<div class='q2'>Know that for your sake I have suffered reproach. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_16">16&#160;</span>Your words were found, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I ate them. </div>
<div class='q'>Your words were to me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am called by your name, Yahweh, God of Armies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_17">17&#160;</span>I didn’t sit in the assembly of those who make merry and rejoice. </div>
<div class='q2'>I sat alone because of your hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have filled me with indignation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_18">18&#160;</span>Why is my pain perpetual, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my wound incurable, </div>
<div class='q2'>which refuses to be healed? </div>
<div class='q'>Will you indeed be to me as a deceitful brook, </div>
<div class='q2'>like waters that fail? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“If you return, then I will bring you again, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may stand before me; </div>
<div class='q'>and if you take out the precious from the vile, </div>
<div class='q2'>you will be as my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>They will return to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will not return to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_20">20&#160;</span>I will make you to this people a fortified bronze wall. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will fight against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they will not prevail against you; </div>
<div class='q'>for I am with you to save you </div>
<div class='q2'>and to deliver you,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR15_21">21&#160;</span>“I will deliver you out of the hand of the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will redeem you out of the hand of the terrible.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_1">1&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_2">2&#160;</span>“You shall not take a wife, neither shall you have sons or daughters, in this place.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_3">3&#160;</span>For Yahweh says concerning the sons and concerning the daughters who are born in this place, and concerning their mothers who bore them, and concerning their fathers who became their father in this land: 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_4">4&#160;</span>“They will die grievous deaths. They will not be lamented, neither will they be buried. They will be as dung on the surface of the ground. They will be consumed by the sword and by famine. Their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the sky and for the animals of the earth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_5">5&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “Don’t enter into the house of mourning. Don’t go to lament. Don’t bemoan them, for I have taken away my peace from this people,” says Yahweh, “even loving kindness and tender mercies. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_6">6&#160;</span>Both great and small will die in this land. They will not be buried. Men won’t lament for them, cut themselves, or make themselves bald for them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_7">7&#160;</span>Men won’t break bread for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead. Men won’t give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_8">8&#160;</span>“You shall not go into the house of feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_9">9&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: “Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_10">10&#160;</span>It will happen, when you tell this people all these words, and they ask you, ‘Why has Yahweh pronounced all this great evil against us?’ or ‘What is our iniquity? or ‘What is our sin that we have committed against Yahweh our God?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_11">11&#160;</span>then you shall tell them, ‘Because your fathers have forsaken me,’ says Yahweh, ‘and have walked after other gods, have served them, have worshiped them, have forsaken me, and have not kept my law. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_12">12&#160;</span>You have done evil more than your fathers, for behold, you each walk after the stubbornness of his evil heart, so that you don’t listen to me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore I will cast you out of this land into the land that you have not known, neither you nor your fathers. There you will serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no favor.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_14">14&#160;</span>“Therefore behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that it will no more be said, ‘As Yahweh lives, who brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_15">15&#160;</span>but, ‘As Yahweh lives, who brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries where he had driven them.’ I will bring them again into their land that I gave to their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_16">16&#160;</span>“Behold, I will send for many fishermen,” says Yahweh, “and they will fish them up. Afterward I will send for many hunters, and they will hunt them from every mountain, from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_17">17&#160;</span>For my eyes are on all their ways. They are not hidden from my face. Their iniquity isn’t concealed from my eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR16_18">18&#160;</span>First I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the carcasses of their detestable things, and have filled my inheritance with their abominations.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh, my strength, my stronghold, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my refuge in the day of affliction, </div>
<div class='q'>the nations will come to you from the ends of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will say, </div>
<div class='q'>“Our fathers have inherited nothing but lies, </div>
<div class='q2'>vanity and things in which there is no profit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_20">20&#160;</span>Should a man make to himself gods </div>
<div class='q2'>which yet are no gods?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR16_21">21&#160;</span>“Therefore behold, I will cause them to know, </div>
<div class='q2'>this once I will cause them to know my hand and my might. </div>
<div class='q2'>Then they will know that my name is Yahweh.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JR17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_1">1&#160;</span>“The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with the point of a diamond. </div>
<div class='q'>It is engraved on the tablet of their heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on the horns of your altars. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_2">2&#160;</span>Even their children remember their altars </div>
<div class='q2'>and their Asherah poles by the green trees on the high hills. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_3">3&#160;</span>My mountain in the field, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will give your substance and all your treasures for a plunder, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your high places, because of sin, throughout all your borders. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_4">4&#160;</span>You, even of yourself, will discontinue from your heritage that I gave you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will cause you to serve your enemies in the land which you don’t know, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have kindled a fire in my anger which will burn forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Cursed is the man who trusts in man, </div>
<div class='q2'>relies on strength of flesh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and whose heart departs from Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_6">6&#160;</span>For he will be like a bush in the desert, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will not see when good comes, </div>
<div class='q'>but will inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>an uninhabited salt land. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_7">7&#160;</span>“Blessed is the man who trusts in Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and whose confidence is in Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_8">8&#160;</span>For he will be as a tree planted by the waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>who spreads out its roots by the river, </div>
<div class='q'>and will not fear when heat comes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but its leaf will be green, </div>
<div class='q'>and will not be concerned in the year of drought. </div>
<div class='q2'>It won’t cease from yielding fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_9">9&#160;</span>The heart is deceitful above all things </div>
<div class='q2'>and it is exceedingly corrupt. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who can know it? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_10">10&#160;</span>“I, Yahweh, search the mind. </div>
<div class='q2'>I try the heart, </div>
<div class='q'>even to give every man according to his ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>according to the fruit of his doings.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_11">11&#160;</span>As the partridge that sits on eggs which she has not laid, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who gets riches, and not by right. </div>
<div class='q'>In the middle of his days, they will leave him. </div>
<div class='q2'>At his end, he will be a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_12">12&#160;</span>A glorious throne, set on high from the beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>is the place of our sanctuary. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh, the hope of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>all who forsake you will be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>Those who depart from me will be written in the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they have forsaken Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>the spring of living waters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_14">14&#160;</span>Heal me, O Yahweh, and I will be healed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Save me, and I will be saved; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you are my praise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, they ask me, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Where is Yahweh’s word? </div>
<div class='q2'>Let it be fulfilled now.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_16">16&#160;</span>As for me, I have not hurried from being a shepherd after you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I haven’t desired the woeful day. You know. </div>
<div class='q2'>That which came out of my lips was before your face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t be a terror to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are my refuge in the day of evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_18">18&#160;</span>Let them be disappointed who persecute me, </div>
<div class='q2'>but let not me be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>Let them be dismayed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but don’t let me be dismayed. </div>
<div class='q'>Bring on them the day of evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroy them with double destruction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR17_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh said this to me: “Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, through which the kings of Judah come in and by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_20">20&#160;</span>Tell them, ‘Hear Yahweh’s word, you kings of Judah, all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these gates: 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Be careful, and bear no burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t carry a burden out of your houses on the Sabbath day. Don’t do any work, but make the Sabbath day holy, as I commanded your fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_23">23&#160;</span>But they didn’t listen. They didn’t turn their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, and might not receive instruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_24">24&#160;</span>It will happen, if you diligently listen to me,” says Yahweh, “to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the Sabbath day, but to make the Sabbath day holy, to do no work therein; 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_25">25&#160;</span>then there will enter in by the gates of this city kings and princes sitting on David’s throne, riding in chariots and on horses, they and their princes, the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and this city will remain forever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_26">26&#160;</span>They will come from the cities of Judah, and from the places around Jerusalem, from the land of Benjamin, from the lowland, from the hill country, and from the South, bringing burnt offerings, sacrifices, meal offerings, and frankincense, and bringing sacrifices of thanksgiving to Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR17_27">27&#160;</span>But if you will not listen to me to make the Sabbath day holy, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in its gates, and it will devour the palaces of Jerusalem. It will not be quenched.” ’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_1">1&#160;</span>The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_2">2&#160;</span>“Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, and there I will cause you to hear my words.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_3">3&#160;</span>Then I went down to the potter’s house, and behold, he was making something on the wheels. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_4">4&#160;</span>When the vessel that he made of the clay was marred in the hand of the potter, he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to make it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_5">5&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_6">6&#160;</span>“House of Israel, can’t I do with you as this potter?” says Yahweh. “Behold, as the clay in the potter’s hand, so are you in my hand, house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_7">7&#160;</span>At the instant I speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_8">8&#160;</span>if that nation, concerning which I have spoken, turns from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do to them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_9">9&#160;</span>At the instant I speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it, 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_10">10&#160;</span>if they do that which is evil in my sight, that they not obey my voice, then I will repent of the good with which I said I would benefit them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_11">11&#160;</span>“Now therefore, speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, ‘Yahweh says: “Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a plan against you. Everyone return from his evil way now, and amend your ways and your doings.” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR18_12">12&#160;</span>But they say, ‘It is in vain; for we will walk after our own plans, and we will each follow the stubbornness of his evil heart.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Ask now among the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Who has heard such things?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>The virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_14">14&#160;</span>Will the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of the field? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will the cold waters that flow down from afar be dried up? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_15">15&#160;</span>For my people have forgotten me. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have burned incense to false gods. </div>
<div class='q'>They have been made to stumble in their ways </div>
<div class='q2'>in the ancient paths, </div>
<div class='q2'>to walk in byways, in a way not built up, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_16">16&#160;</span>to make their land an astonishment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a perpetual hissing. </div>
<div class='q'>Everyone who passes by it will be astonished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shake his head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_17">17&#160;</span>I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will show them the back, and not the face, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the day of their calamity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_18">18&#160;</span>Then they said, “Come! Let’s devise plans against Jeremiah; for the law won’t perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let’s strike him with the tongue, and let’s not give heed to any of his words.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_19">19&#160;</span>Give heed to me, Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and listen to the voice of those who contend with me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_20">20&#160;</span>Should evil be recompensed for good? </div>
<div class='q2'>For they have dug a pit for my soul. </div>
<div class='q'>Remember how I stood before you to speak good for them, </div>
<div class='q2'>to turn away your wrath from them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, </div>
<div class='q2'>and give them over to the power of the sword. </div>
<div class='q'>Let their wives become childless and widows. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let their men be killed </div>
<div class='q2'>and their young men struck by the sword in battle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_22">22&#160;</span>Let a cry be heard from their houses </div>
<div class='q2'>when you bring a troop suddenly on them; </div>
<div class='q'>for they have dug a pit to take me </div>
<div class='q2'>and hidden snares for my feet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR18_23">23&#160;</span>Yet, Yahweh, you know all their counsel against me to kill me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t forgive their iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t blot out their sin from your sight, </div>
<div class='q'>Let them be overthrown before you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Deal with them in the time of your anger.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_1">1&#160;</span>Thus said Yahweh, “Go, and buy a potter’s earthen container, and take some of the elders of the people and of the elders of the priests; 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_2">2&#160;</span>and go out to the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith, and proclaim there the words that I will tell you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_3">3&#160;</span>Say, ‘Hear Yahweh’s word, kings of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says, “Behold, I will bring evil on this place, which whoever hears, his ears will tingle. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_4">4&#160;</span>Because they have forsaken me, and have defiled this place, and have burned incense in it to other gods that they didn’t know—they, their fathers, and the kings of Judah—and have filled this place with the blood of innocents, 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_5">5&#160;</span>and have built the high places of Baal to burn their children in the fire for burnt offerings to Baal, which I didn’t command, nor speak, which didn’t even enter into my mind. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore, behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that this place will no more be called ‘Topheth’, nor ‘The Valley of the son of Hinnom’, but ‘The valley of Slaughter’. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘ “I will make the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem void in this place. I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those who seek their life. I will give their dead bodies to be food for the birds of the sky and for the animals of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_8">8&#160;</span>I will make this city an astonishment and a hissing. Everyone who passes by it will be astonished and hiss because of all its plagues. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_9">9&#160;</span>I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters. They will each eat the flesh of his friend in the siege and in the distress with which their enemies, and those who seek their life, will distress them.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_10">10&#160;</span>“Then you shall break the container in the sight of the men who go with you, 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_11">11&#160;</span>and shall tell them, ‘Yahweh of Armies says: “Even so I will break this people and this city as one breaks a potter’s vessel, that can’t be made whole again. They will bury in Topheth until there is no place to bury. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_12">12&#160;</span>This is what I will do to this place,” says Yahweh, “and to its inhabitants, even making this city as Topheth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_13">13&#160;</span>The houses of Jerusalem and the houses of the kings of Judah, which are defiled, will be as the place of Topheth, even all the houses on whose roofs they have burned incense to all the army of the sky and have poured out drink offerings to other gods.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR19_14">14&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah came from Topheth, where Yahweh had sent him to prophesy, and he stood in the court of Yahweh’s house, and said to all the people: 
<span class="verse" id="JR19_15">15&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says, ‘Behold, I will bring on this city and on all its towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have made their neck stiff, that they may not hear my words.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_1">1&#160;</span>Now Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, who was chief officer in Yahweh’s house, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_2">2&#160;</span>Then Pashhur struck Jeremiah the prophet and put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which was in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_3">3&#160;</span>On the next day, Pashhur released Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then Jeremiah said to him, “Yahweh has not called your name Pashhur, but Magormissabib.<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_4">4&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will make you a terror to yourself and to all your friends. They will fall by the sword of their enemies, and your eyes will see it. I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will carry them captive to Babylon, and will kill them with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover I will give all the riches of this city, and all its gains, and all its precious things, yes, I will give all the treasures of the kings of Judah into the hand of their enemies. They will make them captives, take them, and carry them to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR20_6">6&#160;</span>You, Pashhur, and all who dwell in your house will go into captivity. You will come to Babylon, and there you will die, and there you will be buried, you, and all your friends, to whom you have prophesied falsely.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh, you have persuaded me, and I was persuaded. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are stronger than I, and have prevailed. </div>
<div class='q'>I have become a laughingstock all day. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone mocks me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_8">8&#160;</span>For as often as I speak, I cry out; </div>
<div class='q2'>I cry, “Violence and destruction!” </div>
<div class='q'>because Yahweh’s word has been made a reproach to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a derision, all day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_9">9&#160;</span>If I say that I will not make mention of him, </div>
<div class='q2'>or speak any more in his name, </div>
<div class='q'>then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am weary with holding it in. </div>
<div class='q2'>I can’t. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_10">10&#160;</span>For I have heard the defaming of many: </div>
<div class='q2'>“Terror on every side! </div>
<div class='q2'>Denounce, and we will denounce him!” </div>
<div class='q'>say all my familiar friends, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who watch for my fall. </div>
<div class='q'>“Perhaps he will be persuaded, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we will prevail against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we will take our revenge on him.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_11">11&#160;</span>But Yahweh is with me as an awesome mighty one. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore my persecutors will stumble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they won’t prevail. </div>
<div class='q'>They will be utterly disappointed </div>
<div class='q2'>because they have not dealt wisely, </div>
<div class='q2'>even with an everlasting dishonor which will never be forgotten. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_12">12&#160;</span>But Yahweh of Armies, who tests the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>who sees the heart and the mind, </div>
<div class='q'>let me see your vengeance on them, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I have revealed my cause to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_13">13&#160;</span>Sing to Yahweh! </div>
<div class='q2'>Praise Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has delivered the soul of the needy from the hand of evildoers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_14">14&#160;</span>Cursed is the day in which I was born. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let the day in which my mother bore me be blessed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_15">15&#160;</span>Cursed is the man who brought news to my father, saying, </div>
<div class='q2'>“A boy is born to you,” making him very glad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_16">16&#160;</span>Let that man be as the cities which Yahweh overthrew, </div>
<div class='q2'>and didn’t repent. </div>
<div class='q'>Let him hear a cry in the morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shouting at noontime, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_17">17&#160;</span>because he didn’t kill me from the womb. </div>
<div class='q2'>So my mother would have been my grave, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her womb always great. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR20_18">18&#160;</span>Why did I come out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, </div>
<div class='q2'>that my days should be consumed with shame?  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_1">1&#160;</span>The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur the son of Malchijah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_2">2&#160;</span>“Please inquire of Yahweh for us; for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon makes war against us. Perhaps Yahweh will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may withdraw from us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_3">3&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah said to them, “Tell Zedekiah: 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_4">4&#160;</span>‘Yahweh, the God of Israel says, “Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with which you fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans who besiege you outside the walls; and I will gather them into the middle of this city. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_5">5&#160;</span>I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, in wrath, and in great indignation. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_6">6&#160;</span>I will strike the inhabitants of this city, both man and animal. They will die of a great pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_7">7&#160;</span>Afterward,” says Yahweh, “I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, his servants, and the people, even those who are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life. He will strike them with the edge of the sword. He will not spare them, have pity, or have mercy.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_8">8&#160;</span>“You shall say to this people, ‘Yahweh says: “Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_9">9&#160;</span>He who remains in this city will die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, but he who goes out and passes over to the Chaldeans who besiege you, he will live, and he will escape with his life. 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_10">10&#160;</span>For I have set my face on this city for evil, and not for good,” says Yahweh. “It will be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will burn it with fire.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_11">11&#160;</span>“Concerning the house of the king of Judah, hear Yahweh’s word: 
<span class="verse" id="JR21_12">12&#160;</span>House of David, Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Execute justice in the morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor, </div>
<div class='q'>lest my wrath go out like fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>and burn so that no one can quench it, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of the evil of your doings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, I am against you, O inhabitant of the valley, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of the rock of the plain,’ says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>‘You that say, “Who would come down against us?” </div>
<div class='q2'>or, “Who would enter into our homes?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR21_14">14&#160;</span>I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, says Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will kindle a fire in her forest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will devour all that is around her.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said, “Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak this word there: 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_2">2&#160;</span>‘Hear Yahweh’s word, king of Judah, who sits on David’s throne—you, your servants, and your people who enter in by these gates. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh says: “Execute justice and righteousness, and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor. Do no wrong. Do no violence to the foreigner, the fatherless, or the widow. Don’t shed innocent blood in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_4">4&#160;</span>For if you do this thing indeed, then kings sitting on David’s throne will enter in by the gates of this house, riding in chariots and on horses—they, their servants, and their people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_5">5&#160;</span>But if you will not hear these words, I swear by myself,” says Yahweh, “that this house will become a desolation.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_6">6&#160;</span>For Yahweh says concerning the house of the king of Judah: </div>
<div class='q'>“You are Gilead to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>the head of Lebanon. </div>
<div class='q'>Yet surely I will make you a wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>cities which are not inhabited. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_7">7&#160;</span>I will prepare destroyers against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>everyone with his weapons, </div>
<div class='q'>and they will cut down your choice cedars, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cast them into the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_8">8&#160;</span>“Many nations will pass by this city, and they will each ask his neighbor, ‘Why has Yahweh done this to this great city?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_9">9&#160;</span>Then they will answer, ‘Because they abandoned the covenant of Yahweh their God, worshiped other gods, and served them.’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t weep for the dead. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t bemoan him; </div>
<div class='q'>but weep bitterly for him who goes away, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will return no more, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not see his native country. </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_11">11&#160;</span>For Yahweh says touching Shallum the son of Josiah, king of Judah, who reigned instead of Josiah his father, and who went out of this place: “He won’t return there any more. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_12">12&#160;</span>But he will die in the place where they have led him captive. He will see this land no more.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_13">13&#160;</span>“Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his rooms by injustice; </div>
<div class='q'>who uses his neighbor’s service without wages, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t give him his hire; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_14">14&#160;</span>who says, ‘I will build myself a wide house and spacious rooms,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and cuts out windows for himself, </div>
<div class='q'>with a cedar ceiling, </div>
<div class='q2'>and painted with red. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_15">15&#160;</span>“Should you reign because you strive to excel in cedar? </div>
<div class='q2'>Didn’t your father eat and drink, </div>
<div class='q2'>and do justice and righteousness? </div>
<div class='q2'>Then it was well with him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_16">16&#160;</span>He judged the cause of the poor and needy; </div>
<div class='q2'>so then it was well. </div>
<div class='q'>Wasn’t this to know me?” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_17">17&#160;</span>But your eyes and your heart are only for your covetousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>for shedding innocent blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>for oppression, and for doing violence.” </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_18">18&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah: </div>
<div class='q'>“They won’t lament for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘Ah my brother!’ or, ‘Ah sister!’ </div>
<div class='q'>They won’t lament for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying ‘Ah lord!’ or, ‘Ah his glory!’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_19">19&#160;</span>He will be buried with the burial of a donkey, </div>
<div class='q2'>drawn and cast out beyond the gates of Jerusalem.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_20">20&#160;</span>“Go up to Lebanon, and cry out. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lift up your voice in Bashan, </div>
<div class='q'>and cry from Abarim; </div>
<div class='q2'>for all your lovers have been destroyed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_21">21&#160;</span>I spoke to you in your prosperity, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you said, ‘I will not listen.’ </div>
<div class='q'>This has been your way from your youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you didn’t obey my voice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_22">22&#160;</span>The wind will feed all your shepherds, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your lovers will go into captivity. </div>
<div class='q'>Surely then you will be ashamed </div>
<div class='q2'>and confounded for all your wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_23">23&#160;</span>Inhabitant of Lebanon, </div>
<div class='q2'>who makes your nest in the cedars, </div>
<div class='q'>how greatly to be pitied you will be when pangs come on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>the pain as of a woman in travail! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_24">24&#160;</span>“As I live,” says Yahweh, “though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet on my right hand, I would still pluck you from there. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_25">25&#160;</span>I would give you into the hand of those who seek your life, and into the hand of them of whom you are afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_26">26&#160;</span>I will cast you out with your mother who bore you into another country, where you were not born; and there you will die. 
<span class="verse" id="JR22_27">27&#160;</span>But to the land to which their soul longs to return, there they will not return.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_28">28&#160;</span>Is this man Coniah a despised broken vessel? </div>
<div class='q2'>Is he a vessel in which no one delights? </div>
<div class='q'>Why are they cast out, he and his offspring, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cast into a land which they don’t know? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_29">29&#160;</span>O earth, earth, earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>hear Yahweh’s word! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR22_30">30&#160;</span>Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Record this man as childless, </div>
<div class='q2'>a man who will not prosper in his days; </div>
<div class='q'>for no more will a man of his offspring prosper, </div>
<div class='q2'>sitting on David’s throne </div>
<div class='q2'>and ruling in Judah.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_1">1&#160;</span>“Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture!” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh, the God of Israel, says against the shepherds who feed my people: “You have scattered my flock, driven them away, and have not visited them. Behold, I will visit on you the evil of your doings,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_3">3&#160;</span>“I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all the countries where I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds; and they will be fruitful and multiply. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_4">4&#160;</span>I will set up shepherds over them who will feed them. They will no longer be afraid or dismayed, neither will any be lacking,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_5">5&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“that I will raise to David a righteous Branch; </div>
<div class='q'>and he will reign as king and deal wisely, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will execute justice and righteousness in the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_6">6&#160;</span>In his days Judah will be saved, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel will dwell safely. </div>
<div class='q'>This is his name by which he will be called: </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh our righteousness. </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_7">7&#160;</span>“Therefore, behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that they will no more say, ‘As Yahweh lives, who brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_8">8&#160;</span>but, ‘As Yahweh lives, who brought up and who led the offspring of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all the countries where I had driven them.’ Then they will dwell in their own land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_9">9&#160;</span>Concerning the prophets: </div>
<div class='q'>My heart within me is broken. </div>
<div class='q2'>All my bones shake. </div>
<div class='q'>I am like a drunken man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a man whom wine has overcome, </div>
<div class='q'>because of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because of his holy words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_10">10&#160;</span>“For the land is full of adulterers; </div>
<div class='q2'>for because of the curse the land mourns. </div>
<div class='q'>The pastures of the wilderness have dried up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their course is evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their might is not right; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_11">11&#160;</span>for both prophet and priest are profane. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, in my house I have found their wickedness,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore their way will be to them as slippery places in the darkness. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will be driven on, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fall therein; </div>
<div class='q'>for I will bring evil on them, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the year of their visitation,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_13">13&#160;</span>“I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria. </div>
<div class='q2'>They prophesied by Baal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and caused my people Israel to err. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_14">14&#160;</span>In the prophets of Jerusalem I have also seen a horrible thing: </div>
<div class='q2'>they commit adultery and walk in lies. </div>
<div class='q'>They strengthen the hands of evildoers, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that no one returns from his wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>They have all become to me as Sodom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its inhabitants as Gomorrah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh of Armies says concerning the prophets: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make them drink poisoned water; </div>
<div class='q2'>for from the prophets of Jerusalem ungodliness has gone out into all the land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Don’t listen to the words of the prophets who prophesy to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>They teach you vanity. </div>
<div class='q2'>They speak a vision of their own heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not out of the mouth of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_17">17&#160;</span>They say continually to those who despise me, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Yahweh has said, “You will have peace;” ’ </div>
<div class='q'>and to everyone who walks in the stubbornness of his own heart they say, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘No evil will come on you.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_18">18&#160;</span>For who has stood in the council of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he should perceive and hear his word? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has listened to my word, and heard it? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh’s storm, his wrath, has gone out. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, a whirling storm! </div>
<div class='q2'>It will burst on the head of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh’s anger will not return until he has executed </div>
<div class='q2'>and performed the intents of his heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the latter days, you will understand it perfectly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_21">21&#160;</span>I didn’t send these prophets, yet they ran. </div>
<div class='q2'>I didn’t speak to them, yet they prophesied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_22">22&#160;</span>But if they had stood in my council, </div>
<div class='q2'>then they would have caused my people to hear my words, </div>
<div class='q'>and would have turned them from their evil way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the evil of their doings. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_23">23&#160;</span>“Am I a God at hand,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“and not a God afar off? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_24">24&#160;</span>Can anyone hide himself in secret places </div>
<div class='q2'>so that I can’t see him?” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Don’t I fill heaven and earth?” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_25">25&#160;</span>“I have heard what the prophets have said, who prophesy lies in my name, saying, ‘I had a dream! I had a dream!’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_26">26&#160;</span>How long will this be in the heart of the prophets who prophesy lies, even the prophets of the deceit of their own heart? 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_27">27&#160;</span>They intend to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they each tell his neighbor, as their fathers forgot my name because of Baal. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_28">28&#160;</span>The prophet who has a dream, let him tell a dream; and he who has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the straw to the wheat?” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_29">29&#160;</span>“Isn’t my word like fire?” says Yahweh; “and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_30">30&#160;</span>“Therefore behold, I am against the prophets,” says Yahweh, “who each steal my words from his neighbor. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_31">31&#160;</span>Behold, I am against the prophets,” says Yahweh, “who use their tongues, and say, ‘He says.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_32">32&#160;</span>Behold, I am against those who prophesy lying dreams,” says Yahweh, “who tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and by their vain boasting; yet I didn’t send them or command them. They don’t profit this people at all,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR23_33">33&#160;</span>“When this people, or the prophet, or a priest, asks you, saying, ‘What is the message from Yahweh?’ Then you shall tell them, ‘ “What message? I will cast you off,” says Yahweh.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_34">34&#160;</span>As for the prophet, the priest, and the people, who say, ‘The message from Yahweh,’ I will even punish that man and his household. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_35">35&#160;</span>You will say everyone to his neighbor, and everyone to his brother, ‘What has Yahweh answered?’ and, ‘What has Yahweh said?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_36">36&#160;</span>You will mention the message from Yahweh no more, for every man’s own word has become his message; for you have perverted the words of the living God, of Yahweh of Armies, our God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_37">37&#160;</span>You will say to the prophet, ‘What has Yahweh answered you?’ and, ‘What has Yahweh spoken?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_38">38&#160;</span>Although you say, ‘The message from Yahweh,’ therefore Yahweh says: ‘Because you say this word, “The message from Yahweh,” and I have sent to you, telling you not to say, “The message from Yahweh,” 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_39">39&#160;</span>therefore behold, I will utterly forget you, and I will cast you off with the city that I gave to you and to your fathers, away from my presence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR23_40">40&#160;</span>I will bring an everlasting reproach on you, and a perpetual shame, which will not be forgotten.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh showed me, and behold, two baskets of figs were set before Yahweh’s temple, after Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_2">2&#160;</span>One basket had very good figs, like the figs that are first-ripe; and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_3">3&#160;</span>Then Yahweh asked me, “What do you see, Jeremiah?” </div>
<div class='p'>I said, “Figs. The good figs are very good, and the bad are very bad, so bad that they can’t be eaten.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_5">5&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel says: ‘Like these good figs, so I will regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, as good. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_6">6&#160;</span>For I will set my eyes on them for good, and I will bring them again to this land. I will build them, and not pull them down. I will plant them, and not pluck them up. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_7">7&#160;</span>I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Yahweh. They will be my people, and I will be their God; for they will return to me with their whole heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR24_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘As the bad figs, which can’t be eaten, they are so bad,’ surely Yahweh says, ‘So I will give up Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his princes, and the remnant of Jerusalem who remain in this land, and those who dwell in the land of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_9">9&#160;</span>I will even give them up to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places where I will drive them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR24_10">10&#160;</span>I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence among them, until they are consumed from off the land that I gave to them and to their fathers.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_1">1&#160;</span>The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah (this was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_2">2&#160;</span>which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem: 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_3">3&#160;</span>From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, these twenty-three years, Yahweh’s word has come to me, and I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking; but you have not listened. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh has sent to you all his servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them (but you have not listened or inclined your ear to hear), 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_5">5&#160;</span>saying, “Return now everyone from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that Yahweh has given to you and to your fathers, from of old and even forever more. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t go after other gods to serve them or worship them, and don’t provoke me to anger with the work of your hands; then I will do you no harm.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_7">7&#160;</span>“Yet you have not listened to me,” says Yahweh, “that you may provoke me to anger with the work of your hands to your own hurt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh of Armies says: “Because you have not heard my words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_9">9&#160;</span>behold, I will send and take all the families of the north,” says Yahweh, “and I will send to Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against its inhabitants, and against all these nations around. I will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_10">10&#160;</span>Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_11">11&#160;</span>This whole land will be a desolation, and an astonishment; and these nations will serve the king of Babylon seventy years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_12">12&#160;</span>“It will happen, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon and that nation,” says Yahweh, “for their iniquity. I will make the land of the Chaldeans desolate forever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_13">13&#160;</span>I will bring on that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_14">14&#160;</span>For many nations and great kings will make bondservants of them, even of them. I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of their hands.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_15">15&#160;</span>For Yahweh, the God of Israel, says to me: “Take this cup of the wine of wrath from my hand, and cause all the nations to whom I send you to drink it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_16">16&#160;</span>They will drink, and reel back and forth, and be insane, because of the sword that I will send among them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_17">17&#160;</span>Then I took the cup at Yahweh’s hand, and made all the nations to drink, to whom Yahweh had sent me: 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_18">18&#160;</span>Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, with its kings and its princes, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it is today; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_19">19&#160;</span>Pharaoh king of Egypt, with his servants, his princes, and all his people; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_20">20&#160;</span>and all the mixed people, and all the kings of the land of Uz, all the kings of the Philistines, Ashkelon, Gaza, Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_21">21&#160;</span>Edom, Moab, and the children of Ammon; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_22">22&#160;</span>and all the kings of Tyre, all the kings of Sidon, and the kings of the isle which is beyond the sea; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_23">23&#160;</span>Dedan, Tema, Buz, and all who have the corners of their beard cut off; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_24">24&#160;</span>and all the kings of Arabia, all the kings of the mixed people who dwell in the wilderness; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_25">25&#160;</span>and all the kings of Zimri, all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes; 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_26">26&#160;</span>and all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another; and all the kingdoms of the world, which are on the surface of the earth. The king of Sheshach will drink after them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_27">27&#160;</span>“You shall tell them, ‘Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: “Drink, and be drunk, vomit, fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_28">28&#160;</span>It shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at your hand to drink, then you shall tell them, ‘Yahweh of Armies says: “You shall surely drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR25_29">29&#160;</span>For, behold, I begin to work evil at the city which is called by my name; and should you be utterly unpunished? You will not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword on all the inhabitants of the earth, says Yahweh of Armies.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_30">30&#160;</span>“Therefore prophesy against them all these words, and tell them, </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘Yahweh will roar from on high, </div>
<div class='q2'>and utter his voice from his holy habitation. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will mightily roar against his fold. </div>
<div class='q'>He will give a shout, as those who tread grapes, </div>
<div class='q2'>against all the inhabitants of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_31">31&#160;</span>A noise will come even to the end of the earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has a controversy with the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>He will enter into judgment with all flesh. </div>
<div class='q2'>As for the wicked, he will give them to the sword,” ’ says Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_32">32&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, evil will go out from nation to nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a great storm will be raised up from the uttermost parts of the earth.” </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_33">33&#160;</span>The slain of Yahweh will be at that day from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth. They won’t be lamented. They won’t be gathered or buried. They will be dung on the surface of the ground. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_34">34&#160;</span>Wail, you shepherds, and cry. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wallow in dust, you leader of the flock; </div>
<div class='q'>for the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions have fully come, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will fall like fine pottery. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_35">35&#160;</span>The shepherds will have no way to flee. </div>
<div class='q2'>The leader of the flock will have no escape. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_36">36&#160;</span>A voice of the cry of the shepherds, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wailing of the leader of the flock, </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh destroys their pasture. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_37">37&#160;</span>The peaceful folds are brought to silence </div>
<div class='q2'>because of the fierce anger of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR25_38">38&#160;</span>He has left his covert, as the lion; </div>
<div class='q2'>for their land has become an astonishment because of the fierceness of the oppression, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because of his fierce anger.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_1">1&#160;</span>In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came from Yahweh: 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh says: ‘Stand in the court of Yahweh’s house, and speak to all the cities of Judah which come to worship in Yahweh’s house, all the words that I command you to speak to them. Don’t omit a word. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_3">3&#160;</span>It may be they will listen, and every man turn from his evil way, that I may relent from the evil which I intend to do to them because of the evil of their doings.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_4">4&#160;</span>You shall tell them, “Yahweh says: ‘If you will not listen to me, to walk in my law which I have set before you, 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_5">5&#160;</span>to listen to the words of my servants the prophets whom I send to you, even rising up early and sending them—but you have not listened— 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_6">6&#160;</span>then I will make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_7">7&#160;</span>The priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_8">8&#160;</span>When Jeremiah had finished speaking all that Yahweh had commanded him to speak to all the people, the priests and the prophets and all the people seized him, saying, “You shall surely die! 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_9">9&#160;</span>Why have you prophesied in Yahweh’s name, saying, ‘This house will be like Shiloh, and this city will be desolate, without inhabitant?’ ” All the people were crowded around Jeremiah in Yahweh’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_10">10&#160;</span>When the princes of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king’s house to Yahweh’s house; and they sat in the entry of the new gate of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_11">11&#160;</span>Then the priests and the prophets spoke to the princes and to all the people, saying, “This man is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your ears.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_12">12&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah spoke to all the princes and to all the people, saying, “Yahweh sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that you have heard. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_13">13&#160;</span>Now therefore amend your ways and your doings, and obey Yahweh your God’s voice; then Yahweh will relent from the evil that he has pronounced against you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_14">14&#160;</span>But as for me, behold, I am in your hand. Do with me what is good and right in your eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_15">15&#160;</span>Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood on yourselves, on this city, and on its inhabitants; for in truth Yahweh has sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_16">16&#160;</span>Then the princes and all the people said to the priests and to the prophets: “This man is not worthy of death; for he has spoken to us in the name of Yahweh our God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_17">17&#160;</span>Then certain of the elders of the land rose up, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_18">18&#160;</span>“Micah the Morashtite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah; and he spoke to all the people of Judah, saying, ‘Yahweh of Armies says: </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘Zion will be plowed as a field, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Jerusalem will become heaps, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.’ </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_19">19&#160;</span>Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him to death? Didn’t he fear Yahweh, and entreat the favor of Yahweh, and Yahweh relented of the disaster which he had pronounced against them? We would commit great evil against our own souls that way!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_20">20&#160;</span>There was also a man who prophesied in Yahweh’s name, Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath Jearim; and he prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_21">21&#160;</span>When Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men and all the princes heard his words, the king sought to put him to death; but when Uriah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_22">22&#160;</span>Then Jehoiakim the king sent Elnathan the son of Achbor and certain men with him into Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="JR26_23">23&#160;</span>They fetched Uriah out of Egypt and brought him to Jehoiakim the king, who killed him with the sword and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR26_24">24&#160;</span>But the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, so that they didn’t give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_1">1&#160;</span>In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh says to me: “Make bonds and bars, and put them on your neck. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_3">3&#160;</span>Then send them to the king of Edom, to the king of Moab, to the king of the children of Ammon, to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the messengers who come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_4">4&#160;</span>Give them a command to their masters, saying, ‘Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says, “You shall tell your masters: 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_5">5&#160;</span>‘I have made the earth, the men, and the animals that are on the surface of the earth by my great power and by my outstretched arm. I give it to whom it seems right to me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_6">6&#160;</span>Now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant. I have also given the animals of the field to him to serve him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_7">7&#160;</span>All the nations will serve him, his son, and his son’s son, until the time of his own land comes. Then many nations and great kings will make him their bondservant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘ “ ‘It will happen that I will punish the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon,’ says Yahweh, ‘with the sword, with famine, and with pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_9">9&#160;</span>But as for you, don’t listen to your prophets, to your diviners, to your dreams, to your soothsayers, or to your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying, “You shall not serve the king of Babylon;” 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_10">10&#160;</span>for they prophesy a lie to you, to remove you far from your land, so that I would drive you out, and you would perish. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_11">11&#160;</span>But the nation that brings their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon and serves him, that nation I will let remain in their own land,’ says Yahweh; ‘and they will till it and dwell in it.’ ” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_12">12&#160;</span>I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, “Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_13">13&#160;</span>Why will you die, you and your people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as Yahweh has spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon? 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t listen to the words of the prophets who speak to you, saying, ‘You shall not serve the king of Babylon;’ for they prophesy a lie to you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_15">15&#160;</span>For I have not sent them,” says Yahweh, “but they prophesy falsely in my name; that I may drive you out, and that you may perish, you, and the prophets who prophesy to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR27_16">16&#160;</span>Also I spoke to the priests and to all this people, saying, Yahweh says, “Don’t listen to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you, saying, ‘Behold, the vessels of Yahweh’s house will now shortly be brought again from Babylon;’ for they prophesy a lie to you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t listen to them. Serve the king of Babylon, and live. Why should this city become a desolation? 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_18">18&#160;</span>But if they are prophets, and if Yahweh’s word is with them, let them now make intercession to Yahweh of Armies, that the vessels which are left in Yahweh’s house, in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, don’t go to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_19">19&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies says concerning the pillars, concerning the sea, concerning the bases, and concerning the rest of the vessels that are left in this city, 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_20">20&#160;</span>which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon didn’t take when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem— 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_21">21&#160;</span>yes, Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says concerning the vessels that are left in Yahweh’s house, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem: 
<span class="verse" id="JR27_22">22&#160;</span>‘They will be carried to Babylon, and there they will be, until the day that I visit them,’ says Yahweh; ‘then I will bring them up, and restore them to this place.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_1">1&#160;</span>That same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke to me in Yahweh’s house, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_3">3&#160;</span>Within two full years I will bring again into this place all the vessels of Yahweh’s house that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place and carried to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_4">4&#160;</span>I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, who went to Babylon,’ says Yahweh; ‘for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_5">5&#160;</span>Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people who stood in Yahweh’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_6">6&#160;</span>even the prophet Jeremiah said, “Amen! May Yahweh do so. May Yahweh perform your words which you have prophesied, to bring again the vessels of Yahweh’s house, and all those who are captives, from Babylon to this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_7">7&#160;</span>Nevertheless listen now to this word that I speak in your ears, and in the ears of all the people: 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_8">8&#160;</span>The prophets who have been before me and before you of old prophesied against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, of evil, and of pestilence. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_9">9&#160;</span>As for prophet who prophesies of peace, when the word of the prophet happens, then the prophet will be known, that Yahweh has truly sent him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_10">10&#160;</span>Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar from off the prophet Jeremiah’s neck, and broke it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_11">11&#160;</span>Hananiah spoke in the presence of all the people, saying, “Yahweh says: ‘Even so I will break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon from off the neck of all the nations within two full years.’ ” Then the prophet Jeremiah went his way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_12">12&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, after Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_13">13&#160;</span>“Go, and tell Hananiah, saying, ‘Yahweh says, “You have broken the bars of wood, but you have made in their place bars of iron.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_14">14&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says, “I have put a yoke of iron on the neck of all these nations, that they may serve Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they will serve him. I have also given him the animals of the field.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_15">15&#160;</span>Then the prophet Jeremiah said to Hananiah the prophet, “Listen, Hananiah! Yahweh has not sent you, but you make this people trust in a lie. 
<span class="verse" id="JR28_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will send you away from off the surface of the earth. This year you will die, because you have spoken rebellion against Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR28_17">17&#160;</span>So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_1">1&#160;</span>Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the elders of the captivity, and to the priests, to the prophets, and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_2">2&#160;</span>(after Jeconiah the king, the queen mother, the eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, the craftsmen, and the smiths had departed from Jerusalem), 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_3">3&#160;</span>by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon). It said: </div>
<div class='pi'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says to all the captives whom I have caused to be carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon: 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_5">5&#160;</span>“Build houses and dwell in them. Plant gardens and eat their fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_6">6&#160;</span>Take wives and father sons and daughters. Take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters. Multiply there, and don’t be diminished. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_7">7&#160;</span>Seek the peace of the city where I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray to Yahweh for it; for in its peace you will have peace.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_8">8&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: “Don’t let your prophets who are among you and your diviners deceive you. Don’t listen to your dreams which you cause to be dreamed. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_9">9&#160;</span>For they prophesy falsely to you in my name. I have not sent them,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_10">10&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “After seventy years are accomplished for Babylon, I will visit you and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return to this place. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_11">11&#160;</span>For I know the thoughts that I think toward you,” says Yahweh, “thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you hope and a future. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_12">12&#160;</span>You shall call on me, and you shall go and pray to me, and I will listen to you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_13">13&#160;</span>You shall seek me and find me, when you search for me with all your heart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_14">14&#160;</span>I will be found by you,” says Yahweh, “and I will turn again your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places where I have driven you, says Yahweh. I will bring you again to the place from where I caused you to be carried away captive.” </div>
<div class='pi'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_15">15&#160;</span>Because you have said, “Yahweh has raised us up prophets in Babylon,” 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh says concerning the king who sits on David’s throne, and concerning all the people who dwell in this city, your brothers who haven’t gone with you into captivity, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says: “Behold, I will send on them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like rotten figs that can’t be eaten, they are so bad. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_18">18&#160;</span>I will pursue after them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth, to be an object of horror, an astonishment, a hissing, and a reproach among all the nations where I have driven them, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_19">19&#160;</span>because they have not listened to my words,” says Yahweh, “with which I sent to them my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them; but you would not hear,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='pi'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_20">20&#160;</span>Hear therefore Yahweh’s word, all you captives whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name: “Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and he will kill them before your eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_22">22&#160;</span>A curse will be taken up about them by all the captives of Judah who are in Babylon, saying, ‘Yahweh make you like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire;’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_23">23&#160;</span>because they have done foolish things in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors’ wives, and have spoken words in my name falsely, which I didn’t command them. I am he who knows, and am witness,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_24">24&#160;</span>Concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite you shall speak, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_25">25&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘Because you have sent letters in your own name to all the people who are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_26">26&#160;</span>“Yahweh has made you priest in the place of Jehoiada the priest, that there may be officers in Yahweh’s house, for every man who is crazy and makes himself a prophet, that you should put him in the stocks and in shackles. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_27">27&#160;</span>Now therefore, why have you not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who makes himself a prophet to you, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_28">28&#160;</span>because he has sent to us in Babylon, saying, The captivity is long. Build houses, and dwell in them. Plant gardens, and eat their fruit?” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR29_29">29&#160;</span>Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the hearing of Jeremiah the prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_30">30&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_31">31&#160;</span>“Send to all of the captives, saying, ‘Yahweh says concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite: “Because Shemaiah has prophesied to you, and I didn’t send him, and he has caused you to trust in a lie,” 
<span class="verse" id="JR29_32">32&#160;</span>therefore Yahweh says, “Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite and his offspring. He will not have a man to dwell among this people. He won’t see the good that I will do to my people,” says Yahweh, “because he has spoken rebellion against Yahweh.” ’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_1">1&#160;</span>The word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘Write all the words that I have spoken to you in a book. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_3">3&#160;</span>For, behold, the days come,’ says Yahweh, ‘that I will reverse the captivity of my people Israel and Judah,’ says Yahweh. ‘I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they will possess it.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_4">4&#160;</span>These are the words that Yahweh spoke concerning Israel and concerning Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR30_5">5&#160;</span>For Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“We have heard a voice of trembling; </div>
<div class='q2'>a voice of fear, and not of peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_6">6&#160;</span>Ask now, and see whether a man travails with child. </div>
<div class='q2'>Why do I see every man with his hands on his waist, as a woman in travail, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all faces are turned pale? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_7">7&#160;</span>Alas, for that day is great, so that none is like it! </div>
<div class='q2'>It is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; </div>
<div class='q2'>but he will be saved out of it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_8">8&#160;</span>It will come to pass in that day, says Yahweh of Armies, that I will break his yoke from off your neck, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will burst your bonds. </div>
<div class='q2'>Strangers will no more make them their bondservants; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_9">9&#160;</span>but they will serve Yahweh their God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and David their king, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom I will raise up to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore don’t be afraid, O Jacob my servant, says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be dismayed, Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>For, behold, I will save you from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and save your offspring from the land of their captivity. </div>
<div class='q'>Jacob will return, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be quiet and at ease. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will make him afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_11">11&#160;</span>For I am with you, says Yahweh, to save you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will make a full end of all the nations where I have scattered you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but I will not make a full end of you; </div>
<div class='q'>but I will correct you in measure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will in no way leave you unpunished.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_12">12&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Your hurt is incurable. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your wound is grievous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_13">13&#160;</span>There is no one to plead your cause, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be bound up. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have no healing medicines. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_14">14&#160;</span>All your lovers have forgotten you. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t seek you. </div>
<div class='q'>For I have wounded you with the wound of an enemy, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the chastisement of a cruel one, </div>
<div class='q'>for the greatness of your iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>because your sins were increased. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_15">15&#160;</span>Why do you cry over your injury? </div>
<div class='q2'>Your pain is incurable. </div>
<div class='q'>For the greatness of your iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>because your sins have increased, </div>
<div class='q2'>I have done these things to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore all those who devour you will be devoured. </div>
<div class='q2'>All your adversaries, everyone of them, will go into captivity. </div>
<div class='q'>Those who plunder you will be plunder. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make all who prey on you become prey. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_17">17&#160;</span>For I will restore health to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will heal you of your wounds,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>“because they have called you an outcast, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘It is Zion, whom no man seeks after.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_18">18&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will reverse the captivity of Jacob’s tents, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have compassion on his dwelling places. </div>
<div class='q'>The city will be built on its own hill, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the palace will be inhabited in its own place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_19">19&#160;</span>Thanksgiving will proceed out of them </div>
<div class='q2'>with the voice of those who make merry. </div>
<div class='q'>I will multiply them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will not be few; </div>
<div class='q'>I will also glorify them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will not be small. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_20">20&#160;</span>Their children also will be as before, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their congregation will be established before me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will punish all who oppress them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_21">21&#160;</span>Their prince will be one of them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their ruler will proceed from among them. </div>
<div class='q'>I will cause him to draw near, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will approach me; </div>
<div class='q2'>for who is he who has had boldness to approach me?” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_22">22&#160;</span>“You shall be my people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will be your God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_23">23&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh’s storm, his wrath, has gone out, </div>
<div class='q2'>a sweeping storm; </div>
<div class='q2'>it will burst on the head of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR30_24">24&#160;</span>The fierce anger of Yahweh will not return until he has accomplished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and until he has performed the intentions of his heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the latter days you will understand it.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR31_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_1">1&#160;</span>“At that time,” says Yahweh, “I will be the God of all the families of Israel, and they will be my people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “The people who survive the sword found favor in the wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh appeared of old to me, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“Yes, I have loved you with an everlasting love. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I have drawn you with loving kindness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_4">4&#160;</span>I will build you again, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will be built, O virgin of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>You will again be adorned with your tambourines, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will go out in the dances of those who make merry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_5">5&#160;</span>Again you will plant vineyards on the mountains of Samaria. </div>
<div class='q2'>The planters will plant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will enjoy its fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_6">6&#160;</span>For there will be a day that the watchmen on the hills of Ephraim cry, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Arise! Let’s go up to Zion to Yahweh our God.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_7">7&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Sing with gladness for Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shout for the chief of the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>Publish, praise, and say, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Yahweh, save your people, </div>
<div class='q2'>the remnant of Israel!’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_8">8&#160;</span>Behold, I will bring them from the north country, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gather them from the uttermost parts of the earth, </div>
<div class='q'>along with the blind and the lame, </div>
<div class='q2'>the woman with child and her who travails with child together. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will return as a great company. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_9">9&#160;</span>They will come with weeping. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will lead them with petitions. </div>
<div class='q'>I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>in a straight way in which they won’t stumble; </div>
<div class='q'>for I am a father to Israel. </div>
<div class='q2'>Ephraim is my firstborn. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_10">10&#160;</span>“Hear Yahweh’s word, you nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and declare it in the distant islands. Say, </div>
<div class='q'>‘He who scattered Israel will gather him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and keep him, as a shepherd does his flock.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_11">11&#160;</span>For Yahweh has ransomed Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and redeemed him from the hand of him who was stronger than he. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_12">12&#160;</span>They will come and sing in the height of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will flow to the goodness of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>to the grain, to the new wine, to the oil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the young of the flock and of the herd. </div>
<div class='q'>Their soul will be as a watered garden. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will not sorrow any more at all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_13">13&#160;</span>Then the virgin will rejoice in the dance, </div>
<div class='q2'>the young men and the old together; </div>
<div class='q'>for I will turn their mourning into joy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_14">14&#160;</span>I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my people will be satisfied with my goodness,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“A voice is heard in Ramah, </div>
<div class='q2'>lamentation and bitter weeping, </div>
<div class='q'>Rachel weeping for her children. </div>
<div class='q2'>She refuses to be comforted for her children, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they are no more.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Refrain your voice from weeping, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your eyes from tears, </div>
<div class='q2'>for your work will be rewarded,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“They will come again from the land of the enemy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_17">17&#160;</span>There is hope for your latter end,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Your children will come again to their own territory. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_18">18&#160;</span>“I have surely heard Ephraim grieving thus, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘You have chastised me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I was chastised, as an untrained calf. </div>
<div class='q'>Turn me, and I will be turned, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you are Yahweh my God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_19">19&#160;</span>Surely after that I was turned. </div>
<div class='q2'>I repented. </div>
<div class='q'>After that I was instructed. </div>
<div class='q2'>I struck my thigh. </div>
<div class='q'>I was ashamed, yes, even confounded, </div>
<div class='q2'>because I bore the reproach of my youth.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_20">20&#160;</span>Is Ephraim my dear son? </div>
<div class='q2'>Is he a darling child? </div>
<div class='q'>For as often as I speak against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>I still earnestly remember him. </div>
<div class='q'>therefore my heart yearns for him. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will surely have mercy on him,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_21">21&#160;</span>“Set up road signs. </div>
<div class='q2'>Make guideposts. </div>
<div class='q'>Set your heart toward the highway, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the way by which you went. </div>
<div class='q'>Turn again, virgin of Israel. </div>
<div class='q2'>Turn again to these your cities. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_22">22&#160;</span>How long will you go here and there, </div>
<div class='q2'>you backsliding daughter? </div>
<div class='q'>For Yahweh has created a new thing in the earth: </div>
<div class='q2'>a woman will encompass a man.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: “Yet again they will use this speech in the land of Judah and in its cities, when I reverse their captivity: ‘Yahweh bless you, habitation of righteousness, mountain of holiness.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_24">24&#160;</span>Judah and all its cities will dwell therein together, the farmers, and those who go about with flocks. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_25">25&#160;</span>For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_26">26&#160;</span>On this I awakened, and saw; and my sleep was sweet to me. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_27">27&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and with the seed of animal. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_28">28&#160;</span>It will happen that, like as I have watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to destroy and to afflict, so I will watch over them to build and to plant,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_29">29&#160;</span>“In those days they will say no more, </div>
<div class='q'>“ ‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the children’s teeth are set on edge.’ </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_30">30&#160;</span>But everyone will die for his own iniquity. Every man who eats the sour grapes, his teeth will be set on edge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_31">31&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_32">32&#160;</span>not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, which covenant of mine they broke, although I was a husband to them,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_33">33&#160;</span>“But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,” says Yahweh: </div>
<div class='q'>“I will put my law in their inward parts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will write it in their heart. </div>
<div class='q'>I will be their God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they shall be my people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_34">34&#160;</span>They will no longer each teach his neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every man teach his brother, saying, ‘Know Yahweh;’ </div>
<div class='q'>for they will all know me, </div>
<div class='q2'>from their least to their greatest,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>“for I will forgive their iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will remember their sin no more.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_35">35&#160;</span>Yahweh, who gives the sun for a light by day, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, </div>
<div class='q'>who stirs up the sea, so that its waves roar— </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name, says: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_36">36&#160;</span>“If these ordinances depart from before me,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“then the offspring of Israel also will cease from being a nation before me forever.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_37">37&#160;</span>Yahweh says: “If heaven above can be measured, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, </div>
<div class='q2'>then I will also cast off all the offspring of Israel for all that they have done,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR31_38">38&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that the city will be built to Yahweh from the tower of Hananel to the gate of the corner. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_39">39&#160;</span>The measuring line will go out further straight onward to the hill Gareb, and will turn toward Goah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR31_40">40&#160;</span>The whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes, and all the fields to the brook Kidron, to the corner of the horse gate toward the east, will be holy to Yahweh. It will not be plucked up or thrown down any more forever.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR32_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_1">1&#160;</span>This is the word that came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the tenth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_2">2&#160;</span>Now at that time the king of Babylon’s army was besieging Jerusalem. Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_3">3&#160;</span>For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, “Why do you prophesy, and say, ‘Yahweh says, “Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he will take it; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_4">4&#160;</span>and Zedekiah king of Judah won’t escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but will surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and will speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes will see his eyes; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_5">5&#160;</span>and he will bring Zedekiah to Babylon, and he will be there until I visit him,” says Yahweh, “though you fight with the Chaldeans, you will not prosper?” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_6">6&#160;</span>Jeremiah said, “Yahweh’s word came to me, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_7">7&#160;</span>‘Behold, Hanamel the son of Shallum your uncle will come to you, saying, “Buy my field that is in Anathoth; for the right of redemption is yours to buy it.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_8">8&#160;</span>“So Hanamel my uncle’s son came to me in the court of the guard according to Yahweh’s word, and said to me, ‘Please buy my field that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of Benjamin; for the right of inheritance is yours, and the redemption is yours. Buy it for yourself.’ </div>
<div class='p'>“Then I knew that this was Yahweh’s word. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_9">9&#160;</span>I bought the field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel my uncle’s son, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_10">10&#160;</span>I signed the deed, sealed it, called witnesses, and weighed the money in the balances to him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_11">11&#160;</span>So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed, containing the terms and conditions, and that which was open; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_12">12&#160;</span>and I delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel my uncle’s son, and in the presence of the witnesses who signed the deed of the purchase, before all the Jews who sat in the court of the guard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_13">13&#160;</span>“I commanded Baruch before them, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Take these deeds, this deed of the purchase which is sealed, and this deed which is open, and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may last many days.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_15">15&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: ‘Houses and fields and vineyards will yet again be bought in this land.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_16">16&#160;</span>Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to Yahweh, saying, </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='mi'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_17">17&#160;</span>“Ah Lord Yahweh! Behold, you have made the heavens and the earth by your great power and by your outstretched arm. There is nothing too hard for you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_18">18&#160;</span>You show loving kindness to thousands, and repay the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them. The great, the mighty God, Yahweh of Armies is your name: 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_19">19&#160;</span>great in counsel, and mighty in work; whose eyes are open to all the ways of the children of men, to give everyone according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_20">20&#160;</span>who performed signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even to this day, both in Israel and among other men; and made yourself a name, as it is today; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_21">21&#160;</span>and brought your people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, with wonders, with a strong hand, with an outstretched arm, and with great terror; 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_22">22&#160;</span>and gave them this land, which you swore to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_23">23&#160;</span>They came in and possessed it, but they didn’t obey your voice and didn’t walk in your law. They have done nothing of all that you commanded them to do. Therefore you have caused all this evil to come upon them. </div>
<div class='pi'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_24">24&#160;</span>“Behold, siege ramps have been built against the city to take it. The city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans who fight against it, because of the sword, of the famine, and of the pestilence. What you have spoken has happened. Behold, you see it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_25">25&#160;</span>You have said to me, Lord Yahweh, ‘Buy the field for money, and call witnesses;’ whereas the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_26">26&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_27">27&#160;</span>“Behold, I am Yahweh, the God of all flesh. Is there anything too hard for me? 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_28">28&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says: Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and he will take it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_29">29&#160;</span>The Chaldeans, who fight against this city, will come and set this city on fire, and burn it with the houses on whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal, and poured out drink offerings to other gods, to provoke me to anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_30">30&#160;</span>“For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have done only that which was evil in my sight from their youth; for the children of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_31">31&#160;</span>For this city has been to me a provocation of my anger and of my wrath from the day that they built it even to this day, so that I should remove it from before my face, 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_32">32&#160;</span>because of all the evil of the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger—they, their kings, their princes, their priests, their prophets, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_33">33&#160;</span>They have turned their backs to me, and not their faces. Although I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not listened to receive instruction. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_34">34&#160;</span>But they set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_35">35&#160;</span>They built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through fire to Molech, which I didn’t command them. It didn’t even come into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_36">36&#160;</span>Now therefore Yahweh, the God of Israel, says concerning this city, about which you say, “It is given into the hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence:” 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_37">37&#160;</span>“Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries where I have driven them in my anger, and in my wrath, and in great indignation; and I will bring them again to this place. I will cause them to dwell safely. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_38">38&#160;</span>Then they will be my people, and I will be their God. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_39">39&#160;</span>I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me forever, for their good and the good of their children after them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_40">40&#160;</span>I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from following them, to do them good. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_41">41&#160;</span>Yes, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR32_42">42&#160;</span>For Yahweh says: “Just as I have brought all this great evil on this people, so I will bring on them all the good that I have promised them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_43">43&#160;</span>Fields will be bought in this land, about which you say, ‘It is desolate, without man or animal. It is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR32_44">44&#160;</span>Men will buy fields for money, sign the deeds, seal them, and call witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, and in the places around Jerusalem, in the cities of Judah, in the cities of the hill country, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the South; for I will cause their captivity to be reversed,” says Yahweh.  
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR33_0'>33</div>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_1">1&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was still locked up in the court of the guard, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh who does it, Yahweh who forms it to establish it—Yahweh is his name, says: 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_3">3&#160;</span>‘Call to me, and I will answer you, and will show you great and difficult things, which you don’t know.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_4">4&#160;</span>For Yahweh, the God of Israel, says concerning the houses of this city and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are broken down to make a defense against the mounds and against the sword: 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_5">5&#160;</span>‘While men come to fight with the Chaldeans, and to fill them with the dead bodies of men, whom I have killed in my anger and in my wrath, and for all whose wickedness I have hidden my face from this city, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_6">6&#160;</span>behold, I will bring it health and healing, and I will cure them; and I will reveal to them abundance of peace and truth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_7">7&#160;</span>I will restore the fortunes of Judah and Israel, and will build them as at the first. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_8">8&#160;</span>I will cleanse them from all their iniquity by which they have sinned against me. I will pardon all their iniquities by which they have sinned against me and by which they have transgressed against me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_9">9&#160;</span>This city will be to me for a name of joy, for praise, and for glory, before all the nations of the earth, which will hear all the good that I do to them, and will fear and tremble for all the good and for all the peace that I provide to it.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh says: “Yet again there will be heard in this place, about which you say, ‘It is waste, without man and without animal, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and without animal,’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_11">11&#160;</span>the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those who say, ‘Give thanks to Yahweh of Armies, for Yahweh is good, for his loving kindness endures forever;’ who bring thanksgiving into Yahweh’s house. For I will cause the captivity of the land to be reversed as at the first,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says: “Yet again there will be in this place, which is waste, without man and without animal, and in all its cities, a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_13">13&#160;</span>In the cities of the hill country, in the cities of the lowland, in the cities of the South, in the land of Benjamin, in the places around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, the flocks will again pass under the hands of him who counts them,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_14">14&#160;</span>“Behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, “that I will perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and concerning the house of Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_15">15&#160;</span>“In those days and at that time, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up to David. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will execute justice and righteousness in the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_16">16&#160;</span>In those days Judah will be saved, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Jerusalem will dwell safely. </div>
<div class='q'>This is the name by which she will be called: </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh our righteousness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_17">17&#160;</span>For Yahweh says: “David will never lack a man to sit on the throne of the house of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_18">18&#160;</span>The Levitical priests won’t lack a man before me to offer burnt offerings, to burn meal offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_20">20&#160;</span>“Yahweh says: ‘If you can break my covenant of the day and my covenant of the night, so that there will not be day and night in their time, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_21">21&#160;</span>then my covenant could also be broken with David my servant, that he won’t have a son to reign on his throne; and with the Levitical priests, my ministers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_22">22&#160;</span>As the army of the sky can’t be counted, and the sand of the sea can’t be measured, so I will multiply the offspring of David my servant and the Levites who minister to me.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR33_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_24">24&#160;</span>“Don’t consider what this people has spoken, saying, ‘Has Yahweh cast off the two families which he chose?’ Thus they despise my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_25">25&#160;</span>Yahweh says: “If my covenant of day and night fails, if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth, 
<span class="verse" id="JR33_26">26&#160;</span>then I will also cast away the offspring of Jacob, and of David my servant, so that I will not take of his offspring to be rulers over the offspring of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for I will cause their captivity to be reversed and will have mercy on them.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR34_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_1">1&#160;</span>The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, with all his army, all the kingdoms of the earth that were under his dominion, and all the peoples, were fighting against Jerusalem and against all its cities, saying: 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘Go, and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah, and tell him, Yahweh says, “Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon and he will burn it with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_3">3&#160;</span>You won’t escape out of his hand, but will surely be taken and delivered into his hand. Your eyes will see the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he will speak with you mouth to mouth. You will go to Babylon.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_4">4&#160;</span>“Yet hear Yahweh’s word, O Zedekiah king of Judah. Yahweh says concerning you, ‘You won’t die by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_5">5&#160;</span>You will die in peace; and with the burnings of your fathers, the former kings who were before you, so they will make a burning for you. They will lament you, saying, “Ah Lord!” for I have spoken the word,’ says Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_6">6&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these words to Zedekiah king of Judah in Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_7">7&#160;</span>when the king of Babylon’s army was fighting against Jerusalem and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish and against Azekah; for these alone remained of the cities of Judah as fortified cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_8">8&#160;</span>The word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, after king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people who were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_9">9&#160;</span>that every man should let his male servant, and every man his female servant, who is a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, go free, that no one should make bondservants of them, of a Jew his brother. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_10">10&#160;</span>All the princes and all the people obeyed who had entered into the covenant, that everyone should let his male servant and everyone his female servant go free, that no one should make bondservants of them any more. They obeyed and let them go, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_11">11&#160;</span>but afterwards they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids whom they had let go free to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_13">13&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel, says: ‘I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying: 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_14">14&#160;</span>At the end of seven years, every man of you shall release his brother who is a Hebrew, who has been sold to you, and has served you six years. You shall let him go free from you. But your fathers didn’t listen to me, and didn’t incline their ear. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_15">15&#160;</span>You had now turned, and had done that which is right in my eyes, in every man proclaiming liberty to his neighbor. You had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name; 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_16">16&#160;</span>but you turned and profaned my name, and every man caused his servant and every man his handmaid, whom you had let go free at their pleasure, to return. You brought them into subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says: “You have not listened to me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and every man to his neighbor. Behold, I proclaim to you a liberty,” says Yahweh, “to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. I will make you be tossed back and forth among all the kingdoms of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_18">18&#160;</span>I will give the men who have transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before me when they cut the calf in two and passed between its parts: 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_19">19&#160;</span>the princes of Judah, the princes of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, the priests, and all the people of the land, who passed between the parts of the calf. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_20">20&#160;</span>I will even give them into the hand of their enemies and into the hand of those who seek their life. Their dead bodies will be food for the birds of the sky and for the animals of the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR34_21">21&#160;</span>“I will give Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes into the hands of their enemies, into the hands of those who seek their life and into the hands of the king of Babylon’s army, who has gone away from you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR34_22">22&#160;</span>Behold, I will command,” says Yahweh, “and cause them to return to this city. They will fight against it, take it, and burn it with fire. I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR35_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_1">1&#160;</span>The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_2">2&#160;</span>“Go to the house of the Rechabites, and speak to them, and bring them into Yahweh’s house, into one of the rooms, and give them wine to drink.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_3">3&#160;</span>Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, with his brothers, all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites; 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_4">4&#160;</span>and I brought them into Yahweh’s house, into the room of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man of God, which was by the room of the princes, which was above the room of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_5">5&#160;</span>I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites bowls full of wine, and cups; and I said to them, “Drink wine!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_6">6&#160;</span>But they said, “We will drink no wine; for Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, ‘You shall drink no wine, neither you nor your children, forever. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_7">7&#160;</span>You shall not build a house, sow seed, plant a vineyard, or have any; but all your days you shall dwell in tents, that you may live many days in the land in which you live as nomads.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_8">8&#160;</span>We have obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he commanded us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, or our daughters; 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_9">9&#160;</span>and not to build houses for ourselves to dwell in. We have no vineyard, field, or seed; 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_10">10&#160;</span>but we have lived in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_11">11&#160;</span>But when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, we said, ‘Come! Let’s go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians; so we will dwell at Jerusalem.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_12">12&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_13">13&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Go and tell the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, “Will you not receive instruction to listen to my words?” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_14">14&#160;</span>“The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed; and to this day they drink none, for they obey their father’s commandment; but I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking, and you have not listened to me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_15">15&#160;</span>I have sent also to you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, ‘Every one of you must return now from his evil way, amend your doings, and don’t go after other gods to serve them. Then you will dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers;’ but you have not inclined your ear, nor listened to me. 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_16">16&#160;</span>The sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, but this people has not listened to me.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_17">17&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I will bring on Judah and on all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to them, but they have not heard; and I have called to them, but they have not answered.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR35_18">18&#160;</span>Jeremiah said to the house of the Rechabites, “Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Because you have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according to all that he commanded you,’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR35_19">19&#160;</span>therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Jonadab the son of Rechab will not lack a man to stand before me forever.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR36_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_1">1&#160;</span>In the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_2">2&#160;</span>“Take a scroll of a book, and write in it all the words that I have spoken to you against Israel, against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke to you, from the days of Josiah even to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_3">3&#160;</span>It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I intend to do to them, that they may each return from his evil way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_4">4&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah; and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all Yahweh’s words, which he had spoken to him, on a scroll of a book. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_5">5&#160;</span>Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, “I am restricted. I can’t go into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore you go, and read from the scroll which you have written from my mouth, Yahweh’s words, in the ears of the people in Yahweh’s house on the fast day. Also you shall read them in the ears of all Judah who come out of their cities. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_7">7&#160;</span>It may be they will present their supplication before Yahweh, and will each return from his evil way; for Yahweh has pronounced great anger and wrath against this people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_8">8&#160;</span>Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book Yahweh’s words in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_9">9&#160;</span>Now in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, all the people in Jerusalem and all the people who came from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_10">10&#160;</span>Then Baruch read the words of Jeremiah from the book in Yahweh’s house, in the room of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate of Yahweh’s house, in the ears of all the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_11">11&#160;</span>When Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all Yahweh’s words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_12">12&#160;</span>he went down into the king’s house, into the scribe’s room; and behold, all the princes were sitting there, Elishama the scribe, Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, Elnathan the son of Achbor, Gemariah the son of Shaphan, Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_13">13&#160;</span>Then Micaiah declared to them all the words that he had heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, saying, “Take in your hand the scroll in which you have read in the ears of the people, and come.” </div>
<div class='p'>So Baruch the son of Neriah took the scroll in his hand, and came to them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_15">15&#160;</span>They said to him, “Sit down now, and read it in our hearing.” </div>
<div class='p'>So Baruch read it in their hearing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_16">16&#160;</span>Now when they had heard all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said to Baruch, “We will surely tell the king of all these words.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_17">17&#160;</span>They asked Baruch, saying, “Tell us now, how did you write all these words at his mouth?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_18">18&#160;</span>Then Baruch answered them, “He dictated all these words to me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_19">19&#160;</span>Then the princes said to Baruch, “You and Jeremiah go hide. Don’t let anyone know where you are.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_20">20&#160;</span>They went in to the king into the court, but they had laid up the scroll in the room of Elishama the scribe. Then they told all the words in the hearing of the king. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_21">21&#160;</span>So the king sent Jehudi to get the scroll, and he took it out of the room of Elishama the scribe. Jehudi read it in the hearing of the king, and in the hearing of all the princes who stood beside the king. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_22">22&#160;</span>Now the king was sitting in the winter house in the ninth month, and there was a fire in the brazier burning before him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_23">23&#160;</span>When Jehudi had read three or four columns, the king cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was in the brazier, until all the scroll was consumed in the fire that was in the brazier. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_24">24&#160;</span>The king and his servants who heard all these words were not afraid, and didn’t tear their garments. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_25">25&#160;</span>Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the scroll; but he would not listen to them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_26">26&#160;</span>The king commanded Jerahmeel the king’s son, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to arrest Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; but Yahweh hid them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_27">27&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah, after the king had burned the scroll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_28">28&#160;</span>“Take again another scroll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first scroll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah has burned. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_29">29&#160;</span>Concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah you shall say, ‘Yahweh says: “You have burned this scroll, saying, “Why have you written therein, saying, ‘The king of Babylon will certainly come and destroy this land, and will cause to cease from there man and animal?’ ” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says concerning Jehoiakim king of Judah: “He will have no one to sit on David’s throne. His dead body will be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost. 
<span class="verse" id="JR36_31">31&#160;</span>I will punish him, his offspring, and his servants for their iniquity. I will bring on them, on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and on the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them, but they didn’t listen.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR36_32">32&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah took another scroll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire; and many similar words were added to them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR37_0'>37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_1">1&#160;</span>Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_2">2&#160;</span>But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, listened to Yahweh’s words, which he spoke by the prophet Jeremiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_3">3&#160;</span>Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, “Pray now to Yahweh our God for us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_4">4&#160;</span>Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people, for they had not put him into prison. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_5">5&#160;</span>Pharaoh’s army had come out of Egypt; and when the Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard news of them, they withdrew from Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_6">6&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_7">7&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel, says, ‘You shall tell the king of Judah, who sent you to me to inquire of me: “Behold, Pharaoh’s army, which has come out to help you, will return to Egypt into their own land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_8">8&#160;</span>The Chaldeans will come again, and fight against this city. They will take it and burn it with fire.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_9">9&#160;</span>“Yahweh says, ‘Don’t deceive yourselves, saying, “The Chaldeans will surely depart from us;” for they will not depart. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_10">10&#160;</span>For though you had struck the whole army of the Chaldeans who fight against you, and only wounded men remained among them, they would each rise up in his tent and burn this city with fire.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_11">11&#160;</span>When the army of the Chaldeans had withdrawn from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh’s army, 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_12">12&#160;</span>then Jeremiah went out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to receive his portion there, in the middle of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_13">13&#160;</span>When he was in Benjamin’s gate, a captain of the guard was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he seized Jeremiah the prophet, saying, “You are defecting to the Chaldeans!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_14">14&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah said, “That is false! I am not defecting to the Chaldeans.” </div>
<div class='p'>But he didn’t listen to him; so Irijah seized Jeremiah, and brought him to the princes. 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_15">15&#160;</span>The princes were angry with Jeremiah, and struck him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe; for they had made that the prison. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_16">16&#160;</span>When Jeremiah had come into the dungeon house and into the cells, and Jeremiah had remained there many days, 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_17">17&#160;</span>then Zedekiah the king sent and had him brought out. The king asked him secretly in his house, “Is there any word from Yahweh?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jeremiah said, “There is.” He also said, “You will be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_18">18&#160;</span>Moreover Jeremiah said to king Zedekiah, “How have I sinned against you, against your servants, or against this people, that you have put me in prison? 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_19">19&#160;</span>Now where are your prophets who prophesied to you, saying, ‘The king of Babylon will not come against you, nor against this land?’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR37_20">20&#160;</span>Now please hear, my lord the king: please let my supplication be presented before you, that you not cause me to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR37_21">21&#160;</span>Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard. They gave him daily a loaf of bread out of the bakers’ street, until all the bread in the city was gone. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR38_0'>38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_1">1&#160;</span>Shephatiah the son of Mattan, Gedaliah the son of Pashhur, Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of Malchijah heard the words that Jeremiah spoke to all the people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh says, ‘He who remains in this city will die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, but he who goes out to the Chaldeans will live. He will escape with his life and he will live.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh says, ‘This city will surely be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he will take it.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_4">4&#160;</span>Then the princes said to the king, “Please let this man be put to death, because he weakens the hands of the men of war who remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words to them; for this man doesn’t seek the welfare of this people, but harm.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_5">5&#160;</span>Zedekiah the king said, “Behold, he is in your hand; for the king can’t do anything to oppose you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_6">6&#160;</span>Then they took Jeremiah and threw him into the dungeon of Malchijah the king’s son, that was in the court of the guard. They let down Jeremiah with cords. In the dungeon there was no water, but mire; and Jeremiah sank in the mire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_7">7&#160;</span>Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, a eunuch, who was in the king’s house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon (the king was then sitting in Benjamin’s gate), 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_8">8&#160;</span>Ebedmelech went out of the king’s house, and spoke to the king, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_9">9&#160;</span>“My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon. He is likely to die in the place where he is, because of the famine; for there is no more bread in the city.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_10">10&#160;</span>Then the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, “Take from here thirty men with you, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon, before he dies.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_11">11&#160;</span>So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took from there rags and worn-out garments, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_12">12&#160;</span>Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said to Jeremiah, “Now put these rags and worn-out garments under your armpits under the cords.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jeremiah did so. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_13">13&#160;</span>So they lifted Jeremiah up with the cords, and took him up out of the dungeon; and Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_14">14&#160;</span>Then Zedekiah the king sent and took Jeremiah the prophet to himself into the third entry that is in Yahweh’s house. Then the king said to Jeremiah, “I will ask you something. Hide nothing from me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_15">15&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “If I declare it to you, will you not surely put me to death? If I give you counsel, you will not listen to me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_16">16&#160;</span>So Zedekiah the king swore secretly to Jeremiah, saying, “As Yahweh lives, who made our souls, I will not put you to death, neither will I give you into the hand of these men who seek your life.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_17">17&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, “Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘If you will go out to the king of Babylon’s princes, then your soul will live, and this city will not be burned with fire. You will live, along with your house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_18">18&#160;</span>But if you will not go out to the king of Babylon’s princes, then this city will be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they will burn it with fire, and you won’t escape out of their hand.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_19">19&#160;</span>Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, “I am afraid of the Jews who have defected to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they mock me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_20">20&#160;</span>But Jeremiah said, “They won’t deliver you. Obey, I beg you, Yahweh’s voice, in that which I speak to you; so it will be well with you, and your soul will live. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_21">21&#160;</span>But if you refuse to go out, this is the word that Yahweh has shown me: 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_22">22&#160;</span>‘Behold, all the women who are left in the king of Judah’s house will be brought out to the king of Babylon’s princes, and those women will say, </div>
<div class='q'>“Your familiar friends have turned on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have prevailed over you. </div>
<div class='q'>Your feet are sunk in the mire, </div>
<div class='q2'>they have turned away from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_23">23&#160;</span>They will bring out all your wives and your children to the Chaldeans. You won’t escape out of their hand, but will be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon. You will cause this city to be burned with fire.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_24">24&#160;</span>Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, “Let no man know of these words, and you won’t die. 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_25">25&#160;</span>But if the princes hear that I have talked with you, and they come to you, and tell you, ‘Declare to us now what you have said to the king; don’t hide it from us, and we will not put you to death; also tell us what the king said to you;’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR38_26">26&#160;</span>then you shall tell them, ‘I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan’s house, to die there.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_27">27&#160;</span>Then all the princes came to Jeremiah, and asked him; and he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they stopped speaking with him, for the matter was not perceived. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR38_28">28&#160;</span>So Jeremiah stayed in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR39_0'>39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_1">1&#160;</span>In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army came against Jerusalem, and besieged it. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_2">2&#160;</span>In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_3">3&#160;</span>All the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate: Nergal Sharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag, with all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_4">4&#160;</span>When Zedekiah the king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled and went out of the city by night, by the way of the king’s garden, through the gate between the two walls; and he went out toward the Arabah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_5">5&#160;</span>But the army of the Chaldeans pursued them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. When they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he pronounced judgment on him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_6">6&#160;</span>Then the king of Babylon killed Zedekiah’s sons in Riblah before his eyes. The king of Babylon also killed all the nobles of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_7">7&#160;</span>Moreover he put out Zedekiah’s eyes and bound him in fetters, to carry him to Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_8">8&#160;</span>The Chaldeans burned the king’s house and the people’s houses with fire and broke down the walls of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_9">9&#160;</span>Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the rest of the people who remained in the city, the deserters also who fell away to him, and the rest of the people who remained. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_10">10&#160;</span>But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, who had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_11">11&#160;</span>Now Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon commanded Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard concerning Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_12">12&#160;</span>“Take him and take care of him. Do him no harm; but do to him even as he tells you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_13">13&#160;</span>So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, Nebushazban, Rabsaris, and Nergal Sharezer, Rabmag, and all the chief officers of the king of Babylon 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_14">14&#160;</span>sent and took Jeremiah out of the court of the guard, and committed him to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should bring him home. So he lived among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR39_15">15&#160;</span>Now Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_16">16&#160;</span>“Go, and speak to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, ‘Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: “Behold, I will bring my words on this city for evil, and not for good; and they will be accomplished before you in that day. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_17">17&#160;</span>But I will deliver you in that day,” says Yahweh; “and you will not be given into the hand of the men of whom you are afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JR39_18">18&#160;</span>For I will surely save you. You won’t fall by the sword, but you will escape with your life, because you have put your trust in me,” says Yahweh.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR40_0'>40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_1">1&#160;</span>The word which came to Jeremiah from Yahweh, after Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah who were carried away captive to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_2">2&#160;</span>The captain of the guard took Jeremiah and said to him, “Yahweh your God pronounced this evil on this place; 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_3">3&#160;</span>and Yahweh has brought it, and done according as he spoke. Because you have sinned against Yahweh, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing has come on you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_4">4&#160;</span>Now, behold, I release you today from the chains which are on your hand. If it seems good to you to come with me into Babylon, come, and I will take care of you; but if it seems bad to you to come with me into Babylon, don’t. Behold, all the land is before you. Where it seems good and right to you to go, there go.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_5">5&#160;</span>Now while he had not yet gone back, “Go back then,” he said, “to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people; or go wherever it seems right to you to go.” </div>
<div class='p'>So the captain of the guard gave him food and a present, and let him go. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_6">6&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah went to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah, and lived with him among the people who were left in the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_7">7&#160;</span>Now when all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed to him men, women, children, and of the poorest of the land, of those who were not carried away captive to Babylon, 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_8">8&#160;</span>then Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men came to Gedaliah to Mizpah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_9">9&#160;</span>Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan swore to them and to their men, saying, “Don’t be afraid to serve the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it will be well with you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_10">10&#160;</span>As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who will come to us; but you, gather wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that you have taken.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_11">11&#160;</span>Likewise when all the Jews who were in Moab, and among the children of Ammon, and in Edom, and who were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_12">12&#160;</span>then all the Jews returned out of all places where they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered very much wine and summer fruits. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_13">13&#160;</span>Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 
<span class="verse" id="JR40_14">14&#160;</span>and said to him, “Do you know that Baalis the king of the children of Ammon has sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take your life?” </div>
<div class='p'>But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam didn’t believe them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_15">15&#160;</span>Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, “Please let me go, and I will kill Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man will know it. Why should he take your life, that all the Jews who are gathered to you should be scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR40_16">16&#160;</span>But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to Johanan the son of Kareah, “You shall not do this thing, for you speak falsely of Ishmael.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR41_0'>41</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_1">1&#160;</span>Now in the seventh month, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal offspring and one of the chief officers of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and there they ate bread together in Mizpah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_2">2&#160;</span>Then Ishmael the son of Nethaniah arose, and the ten men who were with him, and struck Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword and killed him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_3">3&#160;</span>Ishmael also killed all the Jews who were with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans men of war who were found there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_4">4&#160;</span>The second day after he had killed Gedaliah, and no man knew it, 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_5">5&#160;</span>men came from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaved and their clothes torn, and having cut themselves, with meal offerings and frankincense in their hand, to bring them to Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_6">6&#160;</span>Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went out from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went, and as he met them, he said to them, “Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_7">7&#160;</span>It was so, when they came into the middle of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah killed them, and cast them into the middle of the pit, he, and the men who were with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_8">8&#160;</span>But ten men were found among those who said to Ishmael, “Don’t kill us; for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey.” </div>
<div class='p'>So he stopped, and didn’t kill them among their brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_9">9&#160;</span>Now the pit in which Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he had killed, by the side of Gedaliah (this was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel), Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with those who were killed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_10">10&#160;</span>Then Ishmael carried away captive all of the people who were left in Mizpah, even the king’s daughters, and all the people who remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the children of Ammon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_11">11&#160;</span>But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done, 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_12">12&#160;</span>then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_13">13&#160;</span>Now when all the people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, then they were glad. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_14">14&#160;</span>So all the people who Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah turned about and came back, and went to Johanan the son of Kareah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_15">15&#160;</span>But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the children of Ammon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR41_16">16&#160;</span>Then Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the forces who were with him took all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he had killed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam—the men of war, with the women, the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_17">17&#160;</span>They departed and lived in Geruth Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt 
<span class="verse" id="JR41_18">18&#160;</span>because of the Chaldeans; for they were afraid of them, because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had killed Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR42_0'>42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_1">1&#160;</span>Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even to the greatest, came near, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_2">2&#160;</span>and said to Jeremiah the prophet, “Please let our supplication be presented before you, and pray for us to Yahweh your God, even for all this remnant, for we are left but a few of many, as your eyes see us, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_3">3&#160;</span>that Yahweh your God may show us the way in which we should walk, and the things that we should do.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_4">4&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, “I have heard you. Behold, I will pray to Yahweh your God according to your words; and it will happen that whatever thing Yahweh answers you, I will declare it to you. I will keep nothing back from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_5">5&#160;</span>Then they said to Jeremiah, “May Yahweh be a true and faithful witness among us, if we don’t do according to all the word with which Yahweh your God sends you to tell us. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_6">6&#160;</span>Whether it is good, or whether it is bad, we will obey the voice of Yahweh our God, to whom we send you; that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of Yahweh our God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_7">7&#160;</span>After ten days, Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_8">8&#160;</span>Then he called Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_9">9&#160;</span>and said to them, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, to whom you sent me to present your supplication before him, says: 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_10">10&#160;</span>‘If you will still live in this land, then I will build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up; for I grieve over the distress that I have brought on you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom you are afraid. Don’t be afraid of him,’ says Yahweh, ‘for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_12">12&#160;</span>I will grant you mercy, that he may have mercy on you, and cause you to return to your own land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘But if you say, “We will not dwell in this land,” so that you don’t obey Yahweh your God’s voice, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_14">14&#160;</span>saying, “No, but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we will see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there we will dwell;” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_15">15&#160;</span>now therefore hear Yahweh’s word, O remnant of Judah! Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘If you indeed set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to live there, 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_16">16&#160;</span>then it will happen that the sword, which you fear, will overtake you there in the land of Egypt; and the famine, about which you are afraid, will follow close behind you there in Egypt; and you will die there. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_17">17&#160;</span>So will it be with all the men who set their faces to go into Egypt to live there. They will die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence. None of them will remain or escape from the evil that I will bring on them.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_18">18&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘As my anger and my wrath has been poured out on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so my wrath will be poured out on you, when you enter into Egypt; and you will be an object of horror, an astonishment, a curse, and a reproach; and you will see this place no more.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR42_19">19&#160;</span>“Yahweh has spoken concerning you, remnant of Judah, ‘Don’t go into Egypt!’ Know certainly that I have testified to you today. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_20">20&#160;</span>For you have dealt deceitfully against your own souls; for you sent me to Yahweh your God, saying, ‘Pray for us to Yahweh our God; and according to all that Yahweh our God says, so declare to us, and we will do it.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_21">21&#160;</span>I have declared it to you today; but you have not obeyed Yahweh your God’s voice in anything for which he has sent me to you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR42_22">22&#160;</span>Now therefore know certainly that you will die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence in the place where you desire to go to live.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR43_0'>43</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR43_1">1&#160;</span>When Jeremiah had finished speaking to all the people all the words of Yahweh their God, with which Yahweh their God had sent him to them, even all these words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_2">2&#160;</span>then Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men spoke, saying to Jeremiah, “You speak falsely. Yahweh our God has not sent you to say, ‘You shall not go into Egypt to live there;’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_3">3&#160;</span>but Baruch the son of Neriah has turned you against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us to death or carry us away captive to Babylon.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR43_4">4&#160;</span>So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, didn’t obey Yahweh’s voice, to dwell in the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_5">5&#160;</span>But Johanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the forces took all the remnant of Judah, who had returned from all the nations where they had been driven, to live in the land of Judah— 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_6">6&#160;</span>the men, the women, the children, the king’s daughters, and every person who Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan; and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_7">7&#160;</span>They came into the land of Egypt, for they didn’t obey Yahweh’s voice; and they came to Tahpanhes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR43_8">8&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_9">9&#160;</span>“Take great stones in your hand and hide them in mortar in the brick work which is at the entry of Pharaoh’s house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_10">10&#160;</span>Tell them, Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne on these stones that I have hidden; and he will spread his royal pavilion over them. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_11">11&#160;</span>He will come, and will strike the land of Egypt; such as are for death will be put to death, and such as are for captivity to captivity, and such as are for the sword to the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_12">12&#160;</span>I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt. He will burn them, and carry them away captive. He will array himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd puts on his garment; and he will go out from there in peace. 
<span class="verse" id="JR43_13">13&#160;</span>He will also break the pillars of Beth Shemesh that is in the land of Egypt; and he will burn the houses of the gods of Egypt with fire.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR44_0'>44</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_1">1&#160;</span>The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews who lived in the land of Egypt, who lived at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Memphis, and in the country of Pathros, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘You have seen all the evil that I have brought on Jerusalem, and on all the cities of Judah. Behold, today they are a desolation, and no man dwells in them, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_3">3&#160;</span>because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, to serve other gods that they didn’t know, neither they, nor you, nor your fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_4">4&#160;</span>However I sent to you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, “Oh, don’t do this abominable thing that I hate.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_5">5&#160;</span>But they didn’t listen and didn’t incline their ear. They didn’t turn from their wickedness, to stop burning incense to other gods. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore my wrath and my anger was poured out, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and they are wasted and desolate, as it is today.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_7">7&#160;</span>“Therefore now Yahweh, the God of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Why do you commit great evil against your own souls, to cut off from yourselves man and woman, infant and nursing child out of the middle of Judah, to leave yourselves no one remaining, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_8">8&#160;</span>in that you provoke me to anger with the works of your hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt where you have gone to live, that you may be cut off, and that you may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth? 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_9">9&#160;</span>Have you forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, the wickedness of the kings of Judah, the wickedness of their wives, your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives which they committed in the land of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_10">10&#160;</span>They are not humbled even to this day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_11">11&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: ‘Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_12">12&#160;</span>I will take the remnant of Judah that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to live there, and they will all be consumed. They will fall in the land of Egypt. They will be consumed by the sword and by the famine. They will die, from the least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine. They will be an object of horror, an astonishment, a curse, and a reproach. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_13">13&#160;</span>For I will punish those who dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_14">14&#160;</span>so that none of the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt to live there, will escape or be left to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return to dwell there; for no one will return except those who will escape.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_15">15&#160;</span>Then all the men who knew that their wives burned incense to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a great assembly, even all the people who lived in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_16">16&#160;</span>“As for the word that you have spoken to us in Yahweh’s name, we will not listen to you. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_17">17&#160;</span>But we will certainly perform every word that has gone out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen of the sky and to pour out drink offerings to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of food, and were well, and saw no evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_18">18&#160;</span>But since we stopped burning incense to the queen of the sky, and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_19">19&#160;</span>The women said, “When we burned incense to the queen of the sky and poured out drink offerings to her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_20">20&#160;</span>Then Jeremiah said to all the people—to the men and to the women, even to all the people who had given him an answer, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_21">21&#160;</span>“The incense that you burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, you and your fathers, your kings and your princes, and the people of the land, didn’t Yahweh remember them, and didn’t it come into his mind? 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_22">22&#160;</span>Thus Yahweh could no longer bear it, because of the evil of your doings and because of the abominations which you have committed. Therefore your land has become a desolation, an astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is today. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_23">23&#160;</span>Because you have burned incense and because you have sinned against Yahweh, and have not obeyed Yahweh’s voice, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; therefore this evil has happened to you, as it is today.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_24">24&#160;</span>Moreover Jeremiah said to all the people, including all the women, “Hear Yahweh’s word, all Judah who are in the land of Egypt! 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_25">25&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says, ‘You and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and with your hands have fulfilled it, saying, “We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of the sky, and to pour out drink offerings to her.” </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘Establish then your vows, and perform your vows.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_26">26&#160;</span>“Therefore hear Yahweh’s word, all Judah who dwell in the land of Egypt: ‘Behold, I have sworn by my great name,’ says Yahweh, ‘that my name will no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, “As the Lord Yahweh lives.” 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_27">27&#160;</span>Behold, I watch over them for evil, and not for good; and all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt will be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until they are all gone. 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_28">28&#160;</span>Those who escape the sword will return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah few in number. All the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt to live there, will know whose word will stand, mine or theirs. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR44_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘This will be the sign to you,’ says Yahweh, ‘that I will punish you in this place, that you may know that my words will surely stand against you for evil.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR44_30">30&#160;</span>Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies and into the hand of those who seek his life, just as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who was his enemy and sought his life.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR45_0'>45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR45_1">1&#160;</span>The message that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_2">2&#160;</span>“Yahweh, the God of Israel, says to you, Baruch: 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_3">3&#160;</span>‘You said, “Woe is me now! For Yahweh has added sorrow to my pain! I am weary with my groaning, and I find no rest.” ’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR45_4">4&#160;</span>“You shall tell him, Yahweh says: ‘Behold, that which I have built, I will break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up; and this in the whole land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR45_5">5&#160;</span>Do you seek great things for yourself? Don’t seek them; for, behold, I will bring evil on all flesh,’ says Yahweh, ‘but I will let you escape with your life wherever you go.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR46_0'>46</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_2">2&#160;</span>Of Egypt: concerning the army of Pharaoh Necoh king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_3">3&#160;</span>“Prepare the buckler and shield, </div>
<div class='q2'>and draw near to battle! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_4">4&#160;</span>Harness the horses, and get up, you horsemen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stand up with your helmets. </div>
<div class='q'>Polish the spears, </div>
<div class='q2'>put on the coats of mail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_5">5&#160;</span>Why have I seen it? </div>
<div class='q2'>They are dismayed and are turned backward. </div>
<div class='q'>Their mighty ones are beaten down, </div>
<div class='q2'>have fled in haste, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t look back. </div>
<div class='q'>Terror is on every side,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_6">6&#160;</span>“Don’t let the swift flee away, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the mighty man escape. </div>
<div class='q'>In the north by the river Euphrates </div>
<div class='q2'>they have stumbled and fallen. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_7">7&#160;</span>“Who is this who rises up like the Nile, </div>
<div class='q2'>like rivers whose waters surge? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_8">8&#160;</span>Egypt rises up like the Nile, </div>
<div class='q2'>like rivers whose waters surge. </div>
<div class='q'>He says, ‘I will rise up. I will cover the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will destroy cities and its inhabitants.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_9">9&#160;</span>Go up, you horses! </div>
<div class='q2'>Rage, you chariots! </div>
<div class='q'>Let the mighty men go out: </div>
<div class='q2'>Cush and Put, who handle the shield; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Ludim, who handle and bend the bow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_10">10&#160;</span>For that day is of the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, </div>
<div class='q2'>a day of vengeance, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may avenge himself of his adversaries. </div>
<div class='q'>The sword will devour and be satiated, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will drink its fill of their blood; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, has a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_11">11&#160;</span>Go up into Gilead, and take balm, virgin daughter of Egypt. </div>
<div class='q2'>You use many medicines in vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no healing for you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_12">12&#160;</span>The nations have heard of your shame, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the earth is full of your cry; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the mighty man has stumbled against the mighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>they both fall together.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_13">13&#160;</span>The word that Yahweh spoke to Jeremiah the prophet, how that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon should come and strike the land of Egypt: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_14">14&#160;</span>“Declare in Egypt, </div>
<div class='q2'>publish in Migdol, </div>
<div class='q2'>and publish in Memphis and in Tahpanhes; </div>
<div class='q'>say, ‘Stand up, and prepare, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the sword has devoured around you.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_15">15&#160;</span>Why are your strong ones swept away? </div>
<div class='q2'>They didn’t stand, because Yahweh pushed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_16">16&#160;</span>He made many to stumble. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, they fell on one another. </div>
<div class='q'>They said, ‘Arise! Let’s go again to our own people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the land of our birth, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the oppressing sword.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_17">17&#160;</span>They cried there, ‘Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; </div>
<div class='q2'>he has let the appointed time pass by.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_18">18&#160;</span>“As I live,” says the King, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose name is Yahweh of Armies, </div>
<div class='q'>“surely like Tabor among the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like Carmel by the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he will come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_19">19&#160;</span>You daughter who dwells in Egypt, </div>
<div class='q2'>furnish yourself to go into captivity; </div>
<div class='q'>for Memphis will become a desolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be burned up, </div>
<div class='q2'>without inhabitant. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_20">20&#160;</span>“Egypt is a very beautiful heifer; </div>
<div class='q2'>but destruction out of the north has come. </div>
<div class='q2'>It has come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_21">21&#160;</span>Also her hired men in the middle of her are like calves of the stall, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they also are turned back. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have fled away together. </div>
<div class='q'>They didn’t stand, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the day of their calamity has come on them, </div>
<div class='q2'>the time of their visitation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_22">22&#160;</span>Its sound will go like the serpent, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they will march with an army, </div>
<div class='q2'>and come against her with axes, as wood cutters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_23">23&#160;</span>They will cut down her forest,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“though it can’t be searched; </div>
<div class='q'>because they are more than the locusts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are innumerable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_24">24&#160;</span>The daughter of Egypt will be disappointed; </div>
<div class='q2'>she will be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_25">25&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: “Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with her gods and her kings, even Pharaoh, and those who trust in him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR46_26">26&#160;</span>I will deliver them into the hand of those who seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants. Afterwards it will be inhabited, as in the days of old,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_27">27&#160;</span>“But don’t you be afraid, Jacob my servant. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be dismayed, Israel; </div>
<div class='q'>for, behold, I will save you from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your offspring from the land of their captivity. </div>
<div class='q'>Jacob will return, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be quiet and at ease. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will make him afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR46_28">28&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid, O Jacob my servant,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“for I am with you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will make a full end of all the nations where I have driven you, </div>
<div class='q'>but I will not make a full end of you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but I will correct you in measure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will in no way leave you unpunished.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR47_0'>47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh struck Gaza. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, waters rise up out of the north, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will become an overflowing stream, </div>
<div class='q'>and will overflow the land and all that is therein, </div>
<div class='q2'>the city and those who dwell therein. </div>
<div class='q'>The men will cry, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the inhabitants of the land will wail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_3">3&#160;</span>At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong ones, </div>
<div class='q2'>at the rushing of his chariots, </div>
<div class='q2'>at the rumbling of his wheels, </div>
<div class='q'>the fathers don’t look back for their children </div>
<div class='q2'>because their hands are so feeble, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_4">4&#160;</span>because of the day that comes to destroy all the Philistines, </div>
<div class='q2'>to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every helper who remains; </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh will destroy the Philistines, </div>
<div class='q2'>the remnant of the isle of Caphtor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_5">5&#160;</span>Baldness has come on Gaza; </div>
<div class='q2'>Ashkelon is brought to nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>You remnant of their valley, </div>
<div class='q2'>how long will you cut yourself? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘You sword of Yahweh, how long will it be before you are quiet? </div>
<div class='q2'>Put yourself back into your scabbard; </div>
<div class='q2'>rest, and be still.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR47_7">7&#160;</span>“How can you be quiet, </div>
<div class='q2'>since Yahweh has given you a command? </div>
<div class='q'>Against Ashkelon, and against the seashore, </div>
<div class='q2'>there he has appointed it.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR48_0'>48</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_1">1&#160;</span>Of Moab. Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Woe to Nebo! </div>
<div class='q2'>For it is laid waste. </div>
<div class='q'>Kiriathaim is disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is taken. </div>
<div class='q'>Misgab<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> is put to shame </div>
<div class='q2'>and broken down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_2">2&#160;</span>The praise of Moab is no more. </div>
<div class='q2'>In Heshbon they have devised evil against her: </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Come! Let’s cut her off from being a nation.’ </div>
<div class='q'>You also, Madmen, will be brought to silence. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sword will pursue you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_3">3&#160;</span>The sound of a cry from Horonaim, </div>
<div class='q2'>desolation and great destruction! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_4">4&#160;</span>Moab is destroyed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her little ones have caused a cry to be heard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_5">5&#160;</span>For they will go up by the ascent of Luhith with continual weeping. </div>
<div class='q2'>For at the descent of Horonaim they have heard the distress of the cry of destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_6">6&#160;</span>Flee! Save your lives! </div>
<div class='q2'>Be like the juniper bush in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_7">7&#160;</span>For, because you have trusted in your works and in your treasures, </div>
<div class='q2'>you also will be taken. </div>
<div class='q'>Chemosh will go out into captivity, </div>
<div class='q2'>his priests and his princes together. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_8">8&#160;</span>The destroyer will come on every city, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no city will escape; </div>
<div class='q'>the valley also will perish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the plain will be destroyed, as Yahweh has spoken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_9">9&#160;</span>Give wings to Moab, </div>
<div class='q2'>that she may fly and get herself away: </div>
<div class='q'>and her cities will become a desolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>without anyone to dwell in them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_10">10&#160;</span>“Cursed is he who does the work of Yahweh negligently; </div>
<div class='q2'>and cursed is he who keeps back his sword from blood. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_11">11&#160;</span>“Moab has been at ease from his youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he has settled on his dregs, </div>
<div class='q'>and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither has he gone into captivity; </div>
<div class='q'>therefore his taste remains in him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his scent is not changed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“that I will send to him those who pour off, </div>
<div class='q'>and they will pour him off; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will empty his vessels, </div>
<div class='q2'>and break their containers in pieces. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_13">13&#160;</span>Moab will be ashamed of Chemosh, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel, their confidence. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_14">14&#160;</span>“How do you say, ‘We are mighty men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and valiant men for the war’? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_15">15&#160;</span>Moab is laid waste, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they have gone up into his cities, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his chosen young men have gone down to the slaughter,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says the King, whose name is Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_16">16&#160;</span>“The calamity of Moab is near to come, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his affliction hurries fast. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_17">17&#160;</span>All you who are around him, bemoan him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all you who know his name, say, </div>
<div class='q'>‘How the strong staff is broken, </div>
<div class='q2'>the beautiful rod!’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_18">18&#160;</span>“You daughter who dwells in Dibon, </div>
<div class='q2'>come down from your glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sit in thirst; </div>
<div class='q'>for the destroyer of Moab has come up against you. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has destroyed your strongholds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_19">19&#160;</span>Inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way and watch. </div>
<div class='q2'>Ask him who flees, and her who escapes; </div>
<div class='q2'>say, ‘What has been done?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_20">20&#160;</span>Moab is disappointed; </div>
<div class='q2'>for it is broken down. </div>
<div class='q'>Wail and cry! </div>
<div class='q2'>Tell it by the Arnon, that Moab is laid waste. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_21">21&#160;</span>Judgment has come on the plain country— </div>
<div class='q2'>on Holon, on Jahzah, on Mephaath, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_22">22&#160;</span>on Dibon, on Nebo, on Beth Diblathaim, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_23">23&#160;</span>on Kiriathaim, on Beth Gamul, on Beth Meon, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_24">24&#160;</span>on Kerioth, on Bozrah, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_25">25&#160;</span>The horn of Moab is cut off, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his arm is broken,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_26">26&#160;</span>“Make him drunk, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he magnified himself against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>Moab will wallow in his vomit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he also will be in derision. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_27">27&#160;</span>For wasn’t Israel a derision to you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Was he found among thieves? </div>
<div class='q'>For as often as you speak of him, </div>
<div class='q2'>you shake your head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_28">28&#160;</span>You inhabitants of Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be like the dove that makes her nest over the mouth of the abyss. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_29">29&#160;</span>“We have heard of the pride of Moab. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is very proud in his loftiness, his pride, </div>
<div class='q2'>his arrogance, and the arrogance of his heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_30">30&#160;</span>I know his wrath,” says Yahweh, “that it is nothing; </div>
<div class='q2'>his boastings have done nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore I will wail for Moab. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I will cry out for all Moab. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will mourn for the men of Kir Heres. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_32">32&#160;</span>With more than the weeping of Jazer </div>
<div class='q2'>I will weep for you, vine of Sibmah. </div>
<div class='q'>Your branches passed over the sea. </div>
<div class='q2'>They reached even to the sea of Jazer. </div>
<div class='q'>The destroyer has fallen on your summer fruits </div>
<div class='q2'>and on your vintage. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_33">33&#160;</span>Gladness and joy is taken away from the fruitful field </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the land of Moab. </div>
<div class='q'>I have caused wine to cease from the wine presses. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will tread with shouting. </div>
<div class='q2'>The shouting will be no shouting. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_34">34&#160;</span>From the cry of Heshbon even to Elealeh, </div>
<div class='q2'>even to Jahaz they have uttered their voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>from Zoar even to Horonaim, to Eglath Shelishiyah; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the waters of Nimrim will also become desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_35">35&#160;</span>Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“him who offers in the high place, </div>
<div class='q2'>and him who burns incense to his gods. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_36">36&#160;</span>Therefore my heart sounds for Moab like flutes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my heart sounds like flutes for the men of Kir Heres. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore the abundance that he has gotten has perished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_37">37&#160;</span>For every head is bald, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every beard clipped. </div>
<div class='q'>There are cuttings on all the hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sackcloth on the waist. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_38">38&#160;</span>On all the housetops of Moab, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in its streets, there is lamentation everywhere; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I have broken Moab like a vessel in which no one delights,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_39">39&#160;</span>“How it is broken down! </div>
<div class='q2'>How they wail! </div>
<div class='q'>How Moab has turned the back with shame! </div>
<div class='q2'>So will Moab become a derision </div>
<div class='q2'>and a terror to all who are around him.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_40">40&#160;</span>For Yahweh says: “Behold, he will fly as an eagle, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will spread out his wings against Moab. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_41">41&#160;</span>Kerioth is taken, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the strongholds are seized. </div>
<div class='q'>The heart of the mighty men of Moab at that day </div>
<div class='q2'>will be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_42">42&#160;</span>Moab will be destroyed from being a people, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he has magnified himself against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_43">43&#160;</span>Terror, the pit, and the snare are on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>inhabitant of Moab,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_44">44&#160;</span>“He who flees from the terror will fall into the pit; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who gets up out of the pit will be taken in the snare, </div>
<div class='q'>for I will bring on him, even on Moab, </div>
<div class='q2'>the year of their visitation,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_45">45&#160;</span>“Those who fled stand without strength under the shadow of Heshbon; </div>
<div class='q2'>for a fire has gone out of Heshbon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a flame from the middle of Sihon, </div>
<div class='q'>and has devoured the corner of Moab, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_46">46&#160;</span>Woe to you, O Moab! </div>
<div class='q2'>The people of Chemosh are undone; </div>
<div class='q'>for your sons are taken away captive, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your daughters into captivity. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR48_47">47&#160;</span>“Yet I will reverse the captivity of Moab in the latter days,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>Thus far is the judgment of Moab.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR49_0'>49</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_1">1&#160;</span>Of the children of Ammon. Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Has Israel no sons? </div>
<div class='q2'>Has he no heir? </div>
<div class='q'>Why then does Malcam possess Gad, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his people dwell in its cities? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore behold, the days come,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>“that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against Rabbah of the children of Ammon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will become a desolate heap, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her daughters will be burned with fire; </div>
<div class='q'>then Israel will possess those who possessed him,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_3">3&#160;</span>“Wail, Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste! </div>
<div class='q2'>Cry, you daughters of Rabbah! </div>
<div class='q'>Clothe yourself in sackcloth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lament, and run back and forth among the fences; </div>
<div class='q'>for Malcam will go into captivity, </div>
<div class='q2'>his priests and his princes together. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_4">4&#160;</span>Why do you boast in the valleys, </div>
<div class='q2'>your flowing valley, backsliding daughter? </div>
<div class='q'>You trusted in her treasures, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘Who will come to me?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, I will bring a terror on you,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, </div>
<div class='q'>“from all who are around you. </div>
<div class='q2'>All of you will be driven completely out, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there will be no one to gather together the fugitives. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_6">6&#160;</span>“But afterward I will reverse the captivity of the children of Ammon,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_7">7&#160;</span>Of Edom, Yahweh of Armies says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Is wisdom no more in Teman? </div>
<div class='q2'>Has counsel perished from the prudent? </div>
<div class='q2'>Has their wisdom vanished? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_8">8&#160;</span>Flee! Turn back! </div>
<div class='q2'>Dwell in the depths, inhabitants of Dedan; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will bring the calamity of Esau on him when I visit him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_9">9&#160;</span>If grape gatherers came to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>would they not leave some gleaning grapes? </div>
<div class='q'>If thieves came by night, </div>
<div class='q2'>wouldn’t they steal until they had enough? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_10">10&#160;</span>But I have made Esau bare, </div>
<div class='q2'>I have uncovered his secret places, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will not be able to hide himself. </div>
<div class='q'>His offspring is destroyed, </div>
<div class='q2'>with his brothers and his neighbors; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he is no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_11">11&#160;</span>Leave your fatherless children. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will preserve them alive. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your widows trust in me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_12">12&#160;</span>For Yahweh says: “Behold, they to whom it didn’t pertain to drink of the cup will certainly drink; and are you he who will altogether go unpunished? You won’t go unpunished, but you will surely drink. 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_13">13&#160;</span>For I have sworn by myself,” says Yahweh, “that Bozrah will become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste, and a curse. All its cities will be perpetual wastes.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_14">14&#160;</span>I have heard news from Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an ambassador is sent among the nations, </div>
<div class='q'>saying, “Gather yourselves together! </div>
<div class='q2'>Come against her! </div>
<div class='q2'>Rise up to the battle!” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_15">15&#160;</span>“For, behold, I have made you small among the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and despised among men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_16">16&#160;</span>As for your terror, </div>
<div class='q2'>the pride of your heart has deceived you, </div>
<div class='q'>O you who dwell in the clefts of the rock, </div>
<div class='q2'>who hold the height of the hill, </div>
<div class='q'>though you should make your nest as high as the eagle, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will bring you down from there,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_17">17&#160;</span>“Edom will become an astonishment. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone who passes by it will be astonished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will hiss at all its plagues. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_18">18&#160;</span>As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and its neighbor cities,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“no man will dwell there, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will any son of man live therein. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_19">19&#160;</span>“Behold, he will come up like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will suddenly make them run away from it, </div>
<div class='q'>and whoever is chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will appoint him over it. </div>
<div class='q'>For who is like me? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will appoint me a time? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is the shepherd who will stand before me?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore hear the counsel of Yahweh, that he has taken against Edom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his purposes that he has purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: </div>
<div class='q'>Surely they will drag them away, </div>
<div class='q2'>the little ones of the flock. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely he will make their habitation desolate over them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_21">21&#160;</span>The earth trembles at the noise of their fall; </div>
<div class='q2'>there is a cry, the noise which is heard in the Red Sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_22">22&#160;</span>Behold, he will come up and fly as the eagle, </div>
<div class='q2'>and spread out his wings against Bozrah. </div>
<div class='q2'>The heart of the mighty men of Edom at that day will be as the heart of a woman in her pangs. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_23">23&#160;</span>Of Damascus: </div>
<div class='q'>“Hamath and Arpad are confounded, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they have heard evil news. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have melted away. </div>
<div class='q'>There is sorrow on the sea. </div>
<div class='q2'>It can’t be quiet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_24">24&#160;</span>Damascus has grown feeble, </div>
<div class='q2'>she turns herself to flee, </div>
<div class='q2'>and trembling has seized her. </div>
<div class='q'>Anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her, </div>
<div class='q2'>as of a woman in travail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_25">25&#160;</span>How is the city of praise not forsaken, </div>
<div class='q2'>the city of my joy? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore her young men will fall in her streets, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the men of war will be brought to silence in that day,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_27">27&#160;</span>“I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will devour the palaces of Ben Hadad.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_28">28&#160;</span>Of Kedar, and of the kingdoms of Hazor, which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon struck, Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Arise, go up to Kedar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroy the children of the east. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_29">29&#160;</span>They will take their tents and their flocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>they will carry away for themselves their curtains, </div>
<div class='q2'>all their vessels, and their camels; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will cry to them, ‘Terror on every side!’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_30">30&#160;</span>Flee! </div>
<div class='q2'>Wander far off! </div>
<div class='q'>Dwell in the depths, you inhabitants of Hazor,” says Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>“for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has taken counsel against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has conceived a purpose against you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_31">31&#160;</span>Arise! Go up to a nation that is at ease, </div>
<div class='q2'>that dwells without care,” says Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>“that has neither gates nor bars, </div>
<div class='q2'>that dwells alone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_32">32&#160;</span>Their camels will be a booty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the multitude of their livestock a plunder. </div>
<div class='q'>I will scatter to all winds those who have the corners of their beards cut off; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will bring their calamity from every side of them,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_33">33&#160;</span>Hazor will be a dwelling place of jackals, </div>
<div class='q2'>a desolation forever. </div>
<div class='q'>No man will dwell there, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will any son of man live therein.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_34">34&#160;</span>Yahweh’s word that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="JR49_35">35&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies says: </div>
<div class='q'>‘Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, </div>
<div class='q2'>the chief of their might. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_36">36&#160;</span>I will bring on Elam the four winds from the four quarters of the sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will scatter them toward all those winds. </div>
<div class='q2'>There will be no nation where the outcasts of Elam will not come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_37">37&#160;</span>I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and before those who seek their life. </div>
<div class='q'>I will bring evil on them, even my fierce anger,’ says Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>‘and I will send the sword after them, </div>
<div class='q2'>until I have consumed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_38">38&#160;</span>I will set my throne in Elam, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will destroy from there king and princes,’ says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR49_39">39&#160;</span>‘But it will happen in the latter days </div>
<div class='q2'>that I will reverse the captivity of Elam,’ says Yahweh.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR50_0'>50</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_1">1&#160;</span>The word that Yahweh spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_2">2&#160;</span>“Declare among the nations and publish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and set up a standard; </div>
<div class='q2'>publish, and don’t conceal; </div>
<div class='q'>say, ‘Babylon has been taken, </div>
<div class='q2'>Bel is disappointed, </div>
<div class='q2'>Merodach is dismayed! </div>
<div class='q'>Her images are disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her idols are dismayed.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_3">3&#160;</span>For a nation comes up out of the north against her, </div>
<div class='q2'>which will make her land desolate, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one will dwell in it. </div>
<div class='q'>They have fled. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are gone, </div>
<div class='q2'>both man and animal. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_4">4&#160;</span>“In those days, and in that time,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“the children of Israel will come, </div>
<div class='q2'>they and the children of Judah together; </div>
<div class='q'>they will go on their way weeping, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will seek Yahweh their God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_5">5&#160;</span>They will inquire concerning Zion with their faces turned toward it, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘Come, and join yourselves to Yahweh in an everlasting covenant </div>
<div class='q2'>that will not be forgotten.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_6">6&#160;</span>My people have been lost sheep. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their shepherds have caused them to go astray. </div>
<div class='q'>They have turned them away on the mountains. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have gone from mountain to hill. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have forgotten their resting place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_7">7&#160;</span>All who found them have devoured them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their adversaries said, ‘We are not guilty, </div>
<div class='q'>because they have sinned against Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>the habitation of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>even Yahweh, the hope of their fathers.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_8">8&#160;</span>“Flee out of the middle of Babylon! </div>
<div class='q2'>Go out of the land of the Chaldeans, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be as the male goats before the flocks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_9">9&#160;</span>For, behold, I will stir up </div>
<div class='q2'>and cause to come up against Babylon a company of great nations from the north country; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will set themselves in array against her. </div>
<div class='q'>She will be taken from there. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their arrows will be as of an expert mighty man. </div>
<div class='q2'>None of them will return in vain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_10">10&#160;</span>Chaldea will be a prey. </div>
<div class='q2'>All who prey on her will be satisfied,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_11">11&#160;</span>“Because you are glad, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you rejoice, </div>
<div class='q'>O you who plunder my heritage, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you are wanton as a heifer that treads out the grain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and neigh as strong horses, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_12">12&#160;</span>your mother will be utterly disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>She who bore you will be confounded. </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, she will be the least of the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_13">13&#160;</span>Because of Yahweh’s wrath she won’t be inhabited, </div>
<div class='q2'>but she will be wholly desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>Everyone who goes by Babylon will be astonished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hiss at all her plagues. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_14">14&#160;</span>Set yourselves in array against Babylon all around, </div>
<div class='q2'>all you who bend the bow; </div>
<div class='q2'>shoot at her. </div>
<div class='q'>Spare no arrows, </div>
<div class='q2'>for she has sinned against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_15">15&#160;</span>Shout against her all around. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has submitted herself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her bulwarks have fallen. </div>
<div class='q'>Her walls have been thrown down, </div>
<div class='q2'>for it is the vengeance of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>Take vengeance on her. </div>
<div class='q2'>As she has done, do to her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_16">16&#160;</span>Cut off the sower from Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and him who handles the sickle in the time of harvest. </div>
<div class='q'>For fear of the oppressing sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>they will each return to their own people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will each flee to their own land. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_17">17&#160;</span>“Israel is a hunted sheep. </div>
<div class='q2'>The lions have driven him away. </div>
<div class='q'>First, the king of Assyria devoured him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and now at last Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon has broken his bones.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_18">18&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, </div>
<div class='q2'>as I have punished the king of Assyria. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_19">19&#160;</span>I will bring Israel again to his pasture, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will feed on Carmel and Bashan. </div>
<div class='q2'>His soul will be satisfied on the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_20">20&#160;</span>In those days, and in that time,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“the iniquity of Israel will be sought for, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there will be none, </div>
<div class='q'>also the sins of Judah, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they won’t be found; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will pardon them whom I leave as a remnant. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_21">21&#160;</span>“Go up against the land of Merathaim, </div>
<div class='q2'>even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod. </div>
<div class='q'>Kill and utterly destroy after them,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“and do according to all that I have commanded you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_22">22&#160;</span>A sound of battle is in the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of great destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_23">23&#160;</span>How the hammer of the whole earth is cut apart and broken! </div>
<div class='q2'>How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_24">24&#160;</span>I have laid a snare for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you are also taken, Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you weren’t aware. </div>
<div class='q'>You are found, </div>
<div class='q2'>and also caught, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you have fought against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_25">25&#160;</span>Yahweh has opened his armory, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has brought out the weapons of his indignation; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, has a work to do in the land of the Chaldeans. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_26">26&#160;</span>Come against her from the farthest border. </div>
<div class='q2'>Open her storehouses. </div>
<div class='q2'>Cast her up as heaps. </div>
<div class='q'>Destroy her utterly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let nothing of her be left. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_27">27&#160;</span>Kill all her bulls. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let them go down to the slaughter. </div>
<div class='q'>Woe to them! For their day has come, </div>
<div class='q2'>the time of their visitation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_28">28&#160;</span>Listen to those who flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>to declare in Zion the vengeance of Yahweh our God, </div>
<div class='q2'>the vengeance of his temple. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_29">29&#160;</span>“Call together the archers against Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>all those who bend the bow. </div>
<div class='q'>Encamp against her all around. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let none of it escape. </div>
<div class='q'>Pay her back according to her work. </div>
<div class='q2'>According to all that she has done, do to her; </div>
<div class='q'>for she has been proud against Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>against the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore her young men will fall in her streets. </div>
<div class='q2'>All her men of war will be brought to silence in that day,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_31">31&#160;</span>“Behold, I am against you, you proud one,” says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies; </div>
<div class='q2'>“for your day has come, </div>
<div class='q2'>the time that I will visit you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_32">32&#160;</span>The proud one will stumble and fall, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one will raise him up. </div>
<div class='q'>I will kindle a fire in his cities, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will devour all who are around him.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_33">33&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says: “The children of Israel and the children of Judah are oppressed together. </div>
<div class='q2'>All who took them captive hold them fast. </div>
<div class='q2'>They refuse to let them go. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_34">34&#160;</span>Their Redeemer is strong. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='q'>He will thoroughly plead their cause, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may give rest to the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_35">35&#160;</span>“A sword is on the Chaldeans,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“and on the inhabitants of Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>on her princes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on her wise men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_36">36&#160;</span>A sword is on the boasters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will become fools. </div>
<div class='q'>A sword is on her mighty men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be dismayed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_37">37&#160;</span>A sword is on their horses, </div>
<div class='q2'>on their chariots, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on all the mixed people who are in the middle of her; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will become as women. </div>
<div class='q'>A sword is on her treasures, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be robbed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_38">38&#160;</span>A drought is on her waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be dried up; </div>
<div class='q'>for it is a land of engraved images, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they are mad over idols. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_39">39&#160;</span>Therefore the wild animals of the desert </div>
<div class='q2'>with the wolves will dwell there. </div>
<div class='q'>The ostriches will dwell therein. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will be inhabited no more forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will it be lived in from generation to generation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_40">40&#160;</span>As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and its neighbor cities,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“so no man will dwell there, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will any son of man live therein. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_41">41&#160;</span>“Behold, a people comes from the north. </div>
<div class='q2'>A great nation and many kings will be stirred up from the uttermost parts of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_42">42&#160;</span>They take up bow and spear. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are cruel, and have no mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their voice roars like the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>They ride on horses, </div>
<div class='q2'>everyone set in array, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a man to the battle, </div>
<div class='q2'>against you, daughter of Babylon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_43">43&#160;</span>The king of Babylon has heard the news of them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his hands become feeble. </div>
<div class='q'>Anguish has taken hold of him, </div>
<div class='q2'>pains as of a woman in labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_44">44&#160;</span>Behold, the enemy will come up like a lion </div>
<div class='q2'>from the thickets of the Jordan against the strong habitation; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will suddenly make them run away from it. </div>
<div class='q'>Whoever is chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will appoint him over it, </div>
<div class='q2'>for who is like me? </div>
<div class='q'>Who will appoint me a time? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is the shepherd who can stand before me?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_45">45&#160;</span>Therefore hear the counsel of Yahweh </div>
<div class='q2'>that he has taken against Babylon; </div>
<div class='q'>and his purposes </div>
<div class='q2'>that he has purposed against the land of the Chaldeans: </div>
<div class='q'>Surely they will drag them away, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the little ones of the flock. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely he will make their habitation desolate over them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR50_46">46&#160;</span>The earth trembles at the noise of the taking of Babylon. </div>
<div class='q2'>The cry is heard among the nations.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR51_0'>51</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and against those who dwell in Lebkamai, a destroying wind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_2">2&#160;</span>I will send to Babylon strangers, who will winnow her. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will empty her land; </div>
<div class='q2'>for in the day of trouble they will be against her all around. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_3">3&#160;</span>Against him who bends, let the archer bend his bow, </div>
<div class='q2'>also against him who lifts himself up in his coat of mail. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t spare her young men! </div>
<div class='q2'>Utterly destroy all her army! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_4">4&#160;</span>They will fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans, </div>
<div class='q2'>and thrust through in her streets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_5">5&#160;</span>For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah, by his God, </div>
<div class='q2'>by Yahweh of Armies; </div>
<div class='q2'>though their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_6">6&#160;</span>“Flee out of the middle of Babylon! </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone save his own life! </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t be cut off in her iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>for it is the time of Yahweh’s vengeance. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will render to her a recompense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_7">7&#160;</span>Babylon has been a golden cup in Yahweh’s hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>who made all the earth drunk. </div>
<div class='q'>The nations have drunk of her wine; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore the nations have gone mad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_8">8&#160;</span>Babylon has suddenly fallen and been destroyed! </div>
<div class='q2'>Wail for her! </div>
<div class='q'>Take balm for her pain. </div>
<div class='q2'>Perhaps she may be healed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_9">9&#160;</span>“We would have healed Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>but she is not healed. </div>
<div class='q'>Forsake her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let’s each go into his own country; </div>
<div class='q'>for her judgment reaches to heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is lifted up even to the skies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_10">10&#160;</span>‘Yahweh has produced our righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Come, and let’s declare in Zion the work of Yahweh our God.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_11">11&#160;</span>“Make the arrows sharp! </div>
<div class='q2'>Hold the shields firmly! </div>
<div class='q'>Yahweh has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, </div>
<div class='q2'>because his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it; </div>
<div class='q'>for it is the vengeance of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>the vengeance of his temple. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_12">12&#160;</span>Set up a standard against the walls of Babylon! </div>
<div class='q2'>Make the watch strong! </div>
<div class='q'>Set the watchmen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prepare the ambushes; </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh has both purposed and done </div>
<div class='q2'>that which he spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_13">13&#160;</span>You who dwell on many waters, abundant in treasures, </div>
<div class='q2'>your end has come, the measure of your covetousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies has sworn by himself, saying, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Surely I will fill you with men, </div>
<div class='q2'>as with locusts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will lift up a shout against you.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_15">15&#160;</span>“He has made the earth by his power. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has established the world by his wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>By his understanding he has stretched out the heavens. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_16">16&#160;</span>When he utters his voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>there is a roar of waters in the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>He makes lightning for the rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings the wind out of his treasuries. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_17">17&#160;</span>“Every man has become stupid and without knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>Every goldsmith is disappointed by his image, </div>
<div class='q'>for his molten images are falsehood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no breath in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_18">18&#160;</span>They are vanity, </div>
<div class='q2'>a work of delusion. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the time of their visitation, they will perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_19">19&#160;</span>The portion of Jacob is not like these, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he formed all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>including the tribe of his inheritance. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_20">20&#160;</span>“You are my battle ax and weapons of war. </div>
<div class='q2'>With you I will break the nations into pieces. </div>
<div class='q2'>With you I will destroy kingdoms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_21">21&#160;</span>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the horse and his rider. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_22">22&#160;</span>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the chariot and him who rides therein. </div>
<div class='q'>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>man and woman. </div>
<div class='q'>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the old man and the youth. </div>
<div class='q'>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the young man and the virgin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_23">23&#160;</span>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the shepherd and his flock. </div>
<div class='q'>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>the farmer and his yoke. </div>
<div class='q'>With you I will break in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>governors and deputies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_24">24&#160;</span>“I will render to Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_25">25&#160;</span>“Behold, I am against you, destroying mountain,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“which destroys all the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>I will stretch out my hand on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>roll you down from the rocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make you a burned mountain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_26">26&#160;</span>They won’t take a cornerstone from you, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor a stone for foundations; </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will be desolate forever,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_27">27&#160;</span>“Set up a standard in the land! </div>
<div class='q2'>Blow the trumpet among the nations! </div>
<div class='q'>Prepare the nations against her! </div>
<div class='q2'>Call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz! </div>
<div class='q'>Appoint a marshal against her! </div>
<div class='q2'>Cause the horses to come up as the swarming locusts! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_28">28&#160;</span>Prepare against her the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>the kings of the Medes, its governors, and all its deputies, and all the land of their dominion! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_29">29&#160;</span>The land trembles and is in pain; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the purposes of Yahweh against Babylon stand, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make the land of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_30">30&#160;</span>The mighty men of Babylon have stopped fighting, </div>
<div class='q2'>they remain in their strongholds. </div>
<div class='q'>Their might has failed. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have become as women. </div>
<div class='q'>Her dwelling places are set on fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her bars are broken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_31">31&#160;</span>One runner will run to meet another, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one messenger to meet another, </div>
<div class='q2'>to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken on every quarter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_32">32&#160;</span>So the passages are seized. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have burned the reeds with fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>The men of war are frightened.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_33">33&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel says: </div>
<div class='q'>“The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor at the time when it is trodden. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yet a little while, and the time of harvest comes for her.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_34">34&#160;</span>“Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon has devoured me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has crushed me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has made me an empty vessel. </div>
<div class='q'>He has, like a monster, swallowed me up. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has filled his mouth with my delicacies. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has cast me out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_35">35&#160;</span>May the violence done to me and to my flesh be on Babylon!” </div>
<div class='q2'>the inhabitant of Zion will say; and, </div>
<div class='q'>“May my blood be on the inhabitants of Chaldea!” </div>
<div class='q2'>will Jerusalem say. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_36">36&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I will plead your cause, </div>
<div class='q2'>and take vengeance for you. </div>
<div class='q'>I will dry up her sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make her fountain dry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_37">37&#160;</span>Babylon will become heaps, </div>
<div class='q2'>a dwelling place for jackals, </div>
<div class='q2'>an astonishment, and a hissing, </div>
<div class='q2'>without inhabitant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_38">38&#160;</span>They will roar together like young lions. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will growl as lions’ cubs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_39">39&#160;</span>When they are inflamed, I will make their feast, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will make them drunk, </div>
<div class='q'>that they may rejoice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sleep a perpetual sleep, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not wake up,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_40">40&#160;</span>“I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>like rams with male goats. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_41">41&#160;</span>“How Sheshach is taken! </div>
<div class='q2'>How the praise of the whole earth is seized! </div>
<div class='q2'>How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_42">42&#160;</span>The sea has come up on Babylon. </div>
<div class='q2'>She is covered with the multitude of its waves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_43">43&#160;</span>Her cities have become a desolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>a dry land, and a desert, </div>
<div class='q2'>a land in which no man dwells. </div>
<div class='q2'>No son of man passes by it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_44">44&#160;</span>I will execute judgment on Bel in Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will bring out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up. </div>
<div class='q'>The nations will not flow any more to him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, the wall of Babylon will fall. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_45">45&#160;</span>“My people, go away from the middle of her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and each of you save yourselves from Yahweh’s fierce anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_46">46&#160;</span>Don’t let your heart faint. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t fear for the news that will be heard in the land. </div>
<div class='q'>For news will come one year, </div>
<div class='q2'>and after that in another year news will come, </div>
<div class='q2'>and violence in the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>ruler against ruler. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_47">47&#160;</span>Therefore behold, the days come that I will execute judgment on the engraved images of Babylon; </div>
<div class='q2'>and her whole land will be confounded. </div>
<div class='q2'>All her slain will fall in the middle of her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_48">48&#160;</span>Then the heavens and the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all that is therein, </div>
<div class='q'>will sing for joy over Babylon; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the destroyers will come to her from the north,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_49">49&#160;</span>“As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the slain of all the land will fall at Babylon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_50">50&#160;</span>You who have escaped the sword, go! </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t stand still! </div>
<div class='q'>Remember Yahweh from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let Jerusalem come into your mind.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_51">51&#160;</span>“We are confounded </div>
<div class='q2'>because we have heard reproach. </div>
<div class='q'>Confusion has covered our faces, </div>
<div class='q2'>for strangers have come into the sanctuaries of Yahweh’s house.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_52">52&#160;</span>“Therefore behold, the days come,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“that I will execute judgment on her engraved images; </div>
<div class='q2'>and through all her land the wounded will groan. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_53">53&#160;</span>Though Babylon should mount up to the sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>and though she should fortify the height of her strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet destroyers will come to her from me,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_54">54&#160;</span>“The sound of a cry comes from Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_55">55&#160;</span>For Yahweh lays Babylon waste, </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroys out of her the great voice! </div>
<div class='q'>Their waves roar like many waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>The noise of their voice is uttered. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_56">56&#160;</span>For the destroyer has come on her, </div>
<div class='q2'>even on Babylon. </div>
<div class='q'>Her mighty men are taken. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their bows are broken in pieces, </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh is a God of retribution. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will surely repay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_57">57&#160;</span>I will make her princes, her wise men, </div>
<div class='q2'>her governors, her deputies, and her mighty men drunk. </div>
<div class='q'>They will sleep a perpetual sleep, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not wake up,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says the King, whose name is Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_58">58&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies says: </div>
<div class='q'>“The wide walls of Babylon will be utterly overthrown. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her high gates will be burned with fire. </div>
<div class='q'>The peoples will labor for vanity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the nations for the fire; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be weary.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR51_59">59&#160;</span>The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah was chief quartermaster. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_60">60&#160;</span>Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come on Babylon, even all these words that are written concerning Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_61">61&#160;</span>Jeremiah said to Seraiah, “When you come to Babylon, then see that you read all these words, 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_62">62&#160;</span>and say, ‘Yahweh, you have spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that no one will dwell in it, neither man nor animal, but that it will be desolate forever.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_63">63&#160;</span>It will be, when you have finished reading this book, that you shall bind a stone to it, and cast it into the middle of the Euphrates. 
<span class="verse" id="JR51_64">64&#160;</span>Then you shall say, ‘Thus will Babylon sink, and will not rise again because of the evil that I will bring on her; and they will be weary.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JR52_0'>52</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_1">1&#160;</span>Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign. He reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, according to all that Jehoiakim had done. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_3">3&#160;</span>For through Yahweh’s anger this happened in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence. </div>
<div class='p'>Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_4">4&#160;</span>In the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it; and they built forts against it round about. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_5">5&#160;</span>So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of king Zedekiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_6">6&#160;</span>In the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_7">7&#160;</span>Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war fled, and went out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king’s garden. Now the Chaldeans were against the city all around. The men of war went toward the Arabah, 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_8">8&#160;</span>but the army of the Chaldeans pursued the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was scattered from him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_9">9&#160;</span>Then they took the king, and carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; and he pronounced judgment on him. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_10">10&#160;</span>The king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. He also killed all the princes of Judah in Riblah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_11">11&#160;</span>He put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison until the day of his death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_12">12&#160;</span>Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood before the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_13">13&#160;</span>He burned Yahweh’s house, and the king’s house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house, he burned with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_14">14&#160;</span>All the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of Jerusalem all around. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_15">15&#160;</span>Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the poorest of the people, and the rest of the people who were left in the city, and those who fell away, who defected to the king of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_16">16&#160;</span>But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vineyard keepers and farmers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_17">17&#160;</span>The Chaldeans broke the pillars of bronze that were in Yahweh’s house and the bases and the bronze sea that were in Yahweh’s house in pieces, and carried all of their bronze to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_18">18&#160;</span>They also took away the pots, the shovels, the snuffers, the basins, the spoons, and all the vessels of bronze with which they ministered. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_19">19&#160;</span>The captain of the guard took away the cups, the fire pans, the basins, the pots, the lamp stands, the spoons, and the bowls; that which was of gold, as gold, and that which was of silver, as silver. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_20">20&#160;</span>They took the two pillars, the one sea, and the twelve bronze bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made for Yahweh’s house. The bronze of all these vessels was without weight. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_21">21&#160;</span>As for the pillars, the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits;<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and a line of twelve cubits encircled it; and its thickness was four fingers. It was hollow. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_22">22&#160;</span>A capital of bronze was on it; and the height of the one capital was five cubits,<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> with network and pomegranates on the capital all around, all of bronze. The second pillar also had the same, with pomegranates. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_23">23&#160;</span>There were ninety-six pomegranates on the sides; all the pomegranates were one hundred on the network all around. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_24">24&#160;</span>The captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold, 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_25">25&#160;</span>and out of the city he took an officer who was set over the men of war; and seven men of those who saw the king’s face, who were found in the city; and the scribe of the captain of the army, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men of the people of the land, who were found in the middle of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_26">26&#160;</span>Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_27">27&#160;</span>The king of Babylon struck them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. </div>
<div class='p'>So Judah was carried away captive out of his land. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_28">28&#160;</span>This is the number of the people whom Nebuchadnezzar carried away captive: </div>
<div class='m'>in the seventh year, three thousand twenty-three Jews; </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_29">29&#160;</span>in the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar, he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty-two persons; </div>
<div class='m'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_30">30&#160;</span>in the twenty-third year of Nebuchadnezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty-five people. </div>
<div class='m'>All the people numbered four thousand six hundred. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JR52_31">31&#160;</span>In the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty-fifth day of the month, Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and released him from prison. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_32">32&#160;</span>He spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon, 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_33">33&#160;</span>and changed his prison garments. Jehoiachin ate bread before him continually all the days of his life. 
<span class="verse" id="JR52_34">34&#160;</span>For his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him by the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:2</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “Lord” is “Adonai.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR1_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR2_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR2_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:18</a>
 <span class="ft">i.e., the Euphrates River</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR7_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:15</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR20_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:3</a>
 <span class="ft">“Magormissabib” means “surrounded by terror”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR32_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR48_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 48:1</a>
 <span class="ft">or, The stronghold</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR52_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52:21</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JR52_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 52:22</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
