<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon John 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>John</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JHN.xhtml#JN21_0'>21</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JN0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Good News According to </div>
<div class='mt'>John  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JN1_1">1&#160;</span>In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_2">2&#160;</span>The same was in the beginning with God. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_3">3&#160;</span>All things were made through him. Without him, nothing was made that has been made. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_4">4&#160;</span>In him was life, and the life was the light of men. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_5">5&#160;</span>The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness hasn’t overcome<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_6">6&#160;</span>There came a man sent from God, whose name was John. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_7">7&#160;</span>The same came as a witness, that he might testify about the light, that all might believe through him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_8">8&#160;</span>He was not the light, but was sent that he might testify about the light. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_9">9&#160;</span>The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into the world. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_10">10&#160;</span>He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world didn’t recognize him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_11">11&#160;</span>He came to his own, and those who were his own didn’t receive him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_12">12&#160;</span>But as many as received him, to them he gave the right to become God’s children, to those who believe in his name: 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_13">13&#160;</span>who were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_14">14&#160;</span>The Word became flesh and lived among us. We saw his glory, such glory as of the only born<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Son of the Father, full of grace and truth. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_15">15&#160;</span>John testified about him. He cried out, saying, “This was he of whom I said, ‘He who comes after me has surpassed me, for he was before me.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_16">16&#160;</span>From his fullness we all received grace upon grace. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_17">17&#160;</span>For the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth were realized through Jesus Christ.<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_18">18&#160;</span>No one has seen God at any time. The only born<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> Son,<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> who is in the bosom of the Father, has declared him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_19">19&#160;</span>This is John’s testimony, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, “Who are you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_20">20&#160;</span>He declared, and didn’t deny, but he declared, “I am not the Christ.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_21">21&#160;</span>They asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I am not.” </div>
<div class='p'>“Are you the prophet?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, “No.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_22">22&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “Who are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_23">23&#160;</span>He said, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, ‘Make straight the way of the Lord,’<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> as Isaiah the prophet said.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_24">24&#160;</span>The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_25">25&#160;</span>They asked him, “Why then do you baptize if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_26">26&#160;</span>John answered them, “I baptize in water, but among you stands one whom you don’t know. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_27">27&#160;</span>He is the one who comes after me, who is preferred before me, whose sandal strap I’m not worthy to loosen.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_28">28&#160;</span>These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_29">29&#160;</span>The next day, he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, “Behold,<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world! 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_30">30&#160;</span>This is he of whom I said, ‘After me comes a man who is preferred before me, for he was before me.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_31">31&#160;</span>I didn’t know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water, that he would be revealed to Israel.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_32">32&#160;</span>John testified, saying, “I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained on him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_33">33&#160;</span>I didn’t recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in water said to me, ‘On whomever you will see the Spirit descending and remaining on him is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_34">34&#160;</span>I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_35">35&#160;</span>Again, the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples, 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_36">36&#160;</span>and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!” 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_37">37&#160;</span>The two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_38">38&#160;</span>Jesus turned and saw them following, and said to them, <span class='wj'>“What are you looking for?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “Rabbi” (which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), “where are you staying?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_39">39&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Come and see.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It was about the tenth hour.<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_40">40&#160;</span>One of the two who heard John and followed him was Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_41">41&#160;</span>He first found his own brother, Simon, and said to him, “We have found the Messiah!” (which is, being interpreted, Christ<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a>). 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_42">42&#160;</span>He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, <span class='wj'>“You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas”</span> (which is by interpretation, Peter).<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_43">43&#160;</span>On the next day, he was determined to go out into Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Follow me.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_44">44&#160;</span>Now Philip was from Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_45">45&#160;</span>Philip found Nathanael, and said to him, “We have found him of whom Moses in the law and also the prophets, wrote: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_46">46&#160;</span>Nathanael said to him, “Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?” </div>
<div class='p'>Philip said to him, “Come and see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_47">47&#160;</span>Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said about him, <span class='wj'>“Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_48">48&#160;</span>Nathanael said to him, “How do you know me?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_49">49&#160;</span>Nathanael answered him, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are King of Israel!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN1_50">50&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Because I told you, ‘I saw you underneath the fig tree,’ do you believe? You will see greater things than these!”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN1_51">51&#160;</span>He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you all, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_1">1&#160;</span>The third day, there was a wedding in Cana of Galilee. Jesus’ mother was there. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_2">2&#160;</span>Jesus also was invited, with his disciples, to the wedding. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_3">3&#160;</span>When the wine ran out, Jesus’ mother said to him, “They have no wine.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Woman, what does that have to do with you and me? My hour has not yet come.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_5">5&#160;</span>His mother said to the servants, “Whatever he says to you, do it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_6">6&#160;</span>Now there were six water pots of stone set there after the Jews’ way of purifying, containing two or three metretes<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> apiece. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Fill the water pots with water.”</span> So they filled them up to the brim. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_8">8&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Now draw some out, and take it to the ruler of the feast.”</span> So they took it. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_9">9&#160;</span>When the ruler of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and didn’t know where it came from (but the servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called the bridegroom 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_10">10&#160;</span>and said to him, “Everyone serves the good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!” 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_11">11&#160;</span>This beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_12">12&#160;</span>After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and they stayed there a few days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_13">13&#160;</span>The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_14">14&#160;</span>He found in the temple those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_15">15&#160;</span>He made a whip of cords and drove all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the changers’ money and overthrew their tables. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_16">16&#160;</span>To those who sold the doves, he said, <span class='wj'>“Take these things out of here! Don’t make my Father’s house a marketplace!”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_17">17&#160;</span>His disciples remembered that it was written, “Zeal for your house will eat me up.”<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_18">18&#160;</span>The Jews therefore answered him, “What sign do you show us, seeing that you do these things?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_19">19&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_20">20&#160;</span>The Jews therefore said, “It took forty-six years to build this temple! Will you raise it up in three days?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_21">21&#160;</span>But he spoke of the temple of his body. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_22">22&#160;</span>When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word which Jesus had said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN2_23">23&#160;</span>Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name, observing his signs which he did. 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_24">24&#160;</span>But Jesus didn’t entrust himself to them, because he knew everyone, 
<span class="verse" id="JN2_25">25&#160;</span>and because he didn’t need for anyone to testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_1">1&#160;</span>Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_2">2&#160;</span>He came to Jesus by night and said to him, “Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_3">3&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, unless one is born anew, </span><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>he can’t see God’s Kingdom.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_4">4&#160;</span>Nicodemus said to him, “How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, unless one is born of water and Spirit, he can’t enter into God’s Kingdom.</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>That which is born of the flesh is flesh. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t marvel that I said to you, ‘You must be born anew.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The wind</span><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but don’t know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_9">9&#160;</span>Nicodemus answered him, “How can these things be?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Are you the teacher of Israel, and don’t understand these things? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, we speak that which we know and testify of that which we have seen, and you don’t receive our witness. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I told you earthly things and you don’t believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one has ascended into heaven but he who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For God so loved the world, that he gave his only born</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For God didn’t send his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who believes in him is not judged. He who doesn’t believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name of the only born Son of God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light, for their works were evil. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For everyone who does evil hates the light and doesn’t come to the light, lest his works would be exposed. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his works may be revealed, that they have been done in God.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_22">22&#160;</span>After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea. He stayed there with them and baptized. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_23">23&#160;</span>John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there. They came and were baptized; 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_24">24&#160;</span>for John was not yet thrown into prison. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore a dispute arose on the part of John’s disciples with some Jews about purification. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_26">26&#160;</span>They came to John and said to him, “Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have testified, behold, he baptizes, and everyone is coming to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_27">27&#160;</span>John answered, “A man can receive nothing unless it has been given him from heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_28">28&#160;</span>You yourselves testify that I said, ‘I am not the Christ,’ but, ‘I have been sent before him.’ 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_29">29&#160;</span>He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom’s voice. Therefore my joy is made full. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_30">30&#160;</span>He must increase, but I must decrease. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN3_31">31&#160;</span>“He who comes from above is above all. He who is from the earth belongs to the earth and speaks of the earth. He who comes from heaven is above all. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_32">32&#160;</span>What he has seen and heard, of that he testifies; and no one receives his witness. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_33">33&#160;</span>He who has received his witness has set his seal to this, that God is true. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_34">34&#160;</span>For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God gives the Spirit without measure. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_35">35&#160;</span>The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JN3_36">36&#160;</span>One who believes in the Son has eternal life, but one who disobeys<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> the Son won’t see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_1">1&#160;</span>Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_2">2&#160;</span>(although Jesus himself didn’t baptize, but his disciples), 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_3">3&#160;</span>he left Judea and departed into Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_4">4&#160;</span>He needed to pass through Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_5">5&#160;</span>So he came to a city of Samaria called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_6">6&#160;</span>Jacob’s well was there. Jesus therefore, being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about the sixth hour.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_7">7&#160;</span>A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Give me a drink.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_8">8&#160;</span>For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_9">9&#160;</span>The Samaritan woman therefore said to him, “How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?” (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.) </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus answered her, <span class='wj'>“If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, ‘Give me a drink,’ you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_11">11&#160;</span>The woman said to him, “Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. So where do you get that living water? 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_12">12&#160;</span>Are you greater than our father Jacob, who gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did his children and his livestock?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_13">13&#160;</span>Jesus answered her, <span class='wj'>“Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst again; but the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_15">15&#160;</span>The woman said to him, “Sir, give me this water, so that I don’t get thirsty, neither come all the way here to draw.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_16">16&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Go, call your husband, and come here.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_17">17&#160;</span>The woman answered, “I have no husband.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“You said well, ‘I have no husband,’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for you have had five husbands; and he whom you now have is not your husband. This you have said truly.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_19">19&#160;</span>The woman said to him, “Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_20">20&#160;</span>Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither in this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You worship that which you don’t know. We worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to be his worshipers. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_25">25&#160;</span>The woman said to him, “I know that Messiah is coming, he who is called Christ.<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> When he has come, he will declare to us all things.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_26">26&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“I am he, the one who speaks to you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_27">27&#160;</span>Just then, his disciples came. They marveled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no one said, “What are you looking for?” or, “Why do you speak with her?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_28">28&#160;</span>So the woman left her water pot, went away into the city, and said to the people, 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_29">29&#160;</span>“Come, see a man who told me everything that I have done. Can this be the Christ?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_30">30&#160;</span>They went out of the city, and were coming to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_31">31&#160;</span>In the meanwhile, the disciples urged him, saying, “Rabbi, eat.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_32">32&#160;</span>But he said to them, <span class='wj'>“I have food to eat that you don’t know about.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_33">33&#160;</span>The disciples therefore said to one another, “Has anyone brought him something to eat?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“My food is to do the will of him who sent me and to accomplish his work. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t you say, ‘There are yet four months until the harvest?’ Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes and look at the fields, that they are white for harvest already. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who reaps receives wages and gathers fruit to eternal life, that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For in this the saying is true, ‘One sows, and another reaps.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I sent you to reap that for which you haven’t labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_39">39&#160;</span>From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, “He told me everything that I have done.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_40">40&#160;</span>So when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_41">41&#160;</span>Many more believed because of his word. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_42">42&#160;</span>They said to the woman, “Now we believe, not because of your speaking; for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_43">43&#160;</span>After the two days he went out from there and went into Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_44">44&#160;</span>For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_45">45&#160;</span>So when he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_46">46&#160;</span>Jesus came therefore again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_47">47&#160;</span>When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and begged him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_48">48&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to him, <span class='wj'>“Unless you see signs and wonders, you will in no way believe.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_49">49&#160;</span>The nobleman said to him, “Sir, come down before my child dies.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN4_50">50&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Go your way. Your son lives.”</span> The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_51">51&#160;</span>As he was going down, his servants met him and reported, saying “Your child lives!” 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_52">52&#160;</span>So he inquired of them the hour when he began to get better. They said therefore to him, “Yesterday at the seventh hour,<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> the fever left him.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_53">53&#160;</span>So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Your son lives.”</span> He believed, as did his whole house. 
<span class="verse" id="JN4_54">54&#160;</span>This is again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_1">1&#160;</span>After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_2">2&#160;</span>Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, there is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, “Bethesda”, having five porches. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_3">3&#160;</span>In these lay a great multitude of those who were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the water; 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_4">4&#160;</span>for an angel went down at certain times into the pool and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was healed of whatever disease he had.<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_5">5&#160;</span>A certain man was there who had been sick for thirty-eight years. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_6">6&#160;</span>When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, <span class='wj'>“Do you want to be made well?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_7">7&#160;</span>The sick man answered him, “Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I’m coming, another steps down before me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_8">8&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Arise, take up your mat, and walk.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_9">9&#160;</span>Immediately, the man was made well, and took up his mat and walked. </div>
<div class='p'>Now that day was a Sabbath. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_10">10&#160;</span>So the Jews said to him who was cured, “It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the mat.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_11">11&#160;</span>He answered them, “He who made me well said to me, <span class='wj'>‘Take up your mat and walk.’</span>” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_12">12&#160;</span>Then they asked him, “Who is the man who said to you, <span class='wj'>‘Take up your mat and walk’</span>?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_13">13&#160;</span>But he who was healed didn’t know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_14">14&#160;</span>Afterward Jesus found him in the temple and said to him, <span class='wj'>“Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that nothing worse happens to you.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_15">15&#160;</span>The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_16">16&#160;</span>For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus and sought to kill him, because he did these things on the Sabbath. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_17">17&#160;</span>But Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“My Father is still working, so I am working, too.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_18">18&#160;</span>For this cause therefore the Jews sought all the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also called God his own Father, making himself equal with God. 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_19">19&#160;</span>Jesus therefore answered them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things he does, these the Son also does likewise. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Father has affection for the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does. He will show him greater works than these, that you may marvel. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Father judges no one, but he has given all judgment to the Son, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He who doesn’t honor the Son doesn’t honor the Father who sent him.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, he who hears my word and believes him who sent me has eternal life, and doesn’t come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the Son of God’s voice; and those who hear will live. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For as the Father has life in himself, even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He also gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t marvel at this, for the hour comes in which all who are in the tombs will hear his voice </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and will come out; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge; and my judgment is righteous, because I don’t seek my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It is another who testifies about me. I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the testimony which I receive is not from man. However, I say these things that you may be saved. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He was the burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John; for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish, the very works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Father himself, who sent me, has testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You don’t have his word living in you, because you don’t believe him whom he sent.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and these are they which testify about me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Yet you will not come to me, that you may have life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I don’t receive glory from men. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I know you, that you don’t have God’s love in yourselves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have come in my Father’s name, and you don’t receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>How can you believe, who receive glory from one another, and you don’t seek the glory that comes from the only God?</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN5_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have set your hope. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote about me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN5_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if you don’t believe his writings, how will you believe my words?”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_1">1&#160;</span>After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of Tiberias. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_2">2&#160;</span>A great multitude followed him, because they saw his signs which he did on those who were sick. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_3">3&#160;</span>Jesus went up into the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_4">4&#160;</span>Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus therefore, lifting up his eyes and seeing that a great multitude was coming to him, said to Philip, <span class='wj'>“Where are we to buy bread, that these may eat?”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_6">6&#160;</span>He said this to test him, for he himself knew what he would do. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_7">7&#160;</span>Philip answered him, “Two hundred denarii<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may receive a little.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_8">8&#160;</span>One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother, said to him, 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_9">9&#160;</span>“There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are these among so many?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Have the people sit down.”</span> Now there was much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_11">11&#160;</span>Jesus took the loaves, and having given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down, likewise also of the fish as much as they desired. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_12">12&#160;</span>When they were filled, he said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that nothing be lost.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_13">13&#160;</span>So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_14">14&#160;</span>When therefore the people saw the sign which Jesus did, they said, “This is truly the prophet who comes into the world.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_15">15&#160;</span>Jesus therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain by himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_16">16&#160;</span>When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_17">17&#160;</span>They entered into the boat, and were going over the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_18">18&#160;</span>The sea was tossed by a great wind blowing. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_19">19&#160;</span>When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia,<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> they saw Jesus walking on the sea<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> and drawing near to the boat; and they were afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_20">20&#160;</span>But he said to them, <span class='wj'>“It is I.</span><a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>Don’t be afraid.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_21">21&#160;</span>They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat. Immediately the boat was at the land where they were going. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_22">22&#160;</span>On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, except the one in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus hadn’t entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had gone away alone. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_23">23&#160;</span>However, boats from Tiberias came near to the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_24">24&#160;</span>When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus wasn’t there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_25">25&#160;</span>When they found him on the other side of the sea, they asked him, “Rabbi, when did you come here?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_26">26&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves and were filled. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t work for the food which perishes, but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_28">28&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “What must we do, that we may work the works of God?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_30">30&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “What then do you do for a sign, that we may see and believe you? What work do you do? 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_31">31&#160;</span>Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness. As it is written, ‘He gave them bread out of heaven<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> to eat.’ ”<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_32">32&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you, it wasn’t Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the bread of God is that which comes down out of heaven and gives life to the world.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_34">34&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “Lord, always give us this bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“I am the bread of life. Whoever comes to me will not be hungry, and whoever believes in me will never be thirsty. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I told you that you have seen me, and yet you don’t believe. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All those whom the Father gives me will come to me. He who comes to me I will in no way throw out. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the will of my Father who sent me, that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing, but should raise him up at the last day. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the will of the one who sent me, that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_41">41&#160;</span>The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, <span class='wj'>“I am the bread which came down out of heaven.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_42">42&#160;</span>They said, “Isn’t this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does he say, <span class='wj'>‘I have come down out of heaven?’ ” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_43">43&#160;</span>Therefore Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Don’t murmur among yourselves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him; and I will raise him up in the last day. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It is written in the prophets, ‘They will all be taught by God.’ </span> <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>Therefore everyone who hears from the Father and has learned, comes to me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God. He has seen the Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly, I tell you, he who believes in me has eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the bread of life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness and they died. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the bread which comes down out of heaven, that anyone may eat of it and not die. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_51">51&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the living bread which came down out of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Yes, the bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_52">52&#160;</span>The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying, “How can this man give us his flesh to eat?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_53">53&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you don’t have life in yourselves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_54">54&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_55">55&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_56">56&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives in me, and I in him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_57">57&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, so he who feeds on me will also live because of me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_58">58&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the bread which came down out of heaven—not as our fathers ate the manna and died. He who eats this bread will live forever.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_59">59&#160;</span>He said these things in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_60">60&#160;</span>Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this, said, “This is a hard saying! Who can listen to it?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_61">61&#160;</span>But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said to them, <span class='wj'>“Does this cause you to stumble? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_62">62&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then what if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_63">63&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It is the spirit who gives life. The flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_64">64&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But there are some of you who don’t believe.”</span> For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who didn’t believe, and who it was who would betray him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_65">65&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“For this cause I have said to you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my Father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_66">66&#160;</span>At this, many of his disciples went back and walked no more with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_67">67&#160;</span>Jesus said therefore to the twelve, <span class='wj'>“You don’t also want to go away, do you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_68">68&#160;</span>Simon Peter answered him, “Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life. 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_69">69&#160;</span>We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN6_70">70&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Didn’t I choose you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil?”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN6_71">71&#160;</span>Now he spoke of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of the twelve.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_1">1&#160;</span>After these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee, for he wouldn’t walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_2">2&#160;</span>Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Booths, was at hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_3">3&#160;</span>His brothers therefore said to him, “Depart from here and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_4">4&#160;</span>For no one does anything in secret while he seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_5">5&#160;</span>For even his brothers didn’t believe in him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_6">6&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The world can’t hate you, but it hates me, because I testify about it, that its works are evil. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You go up to the feast. I am not yet going up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_9">9&#160;</span>Having said these things to them, he stayed in Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_10">10&#160;</span>But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_11">11&#160;</span>The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, “Where is he?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_12">12&#160;</span>There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him. Some said, “He is a good man.” Others said, “Not so, but he leads the multitude astray.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_13">13&#160;</span>Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_14">14&#160;</span>But when it was now the middle of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_15">15&#160;</span>The Jews therefore marveled, saying, “How does this man know letters, having never been educated?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_16">16&#160;</span>Jesus therefore answered them, <span class='wj'>“My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone desires to do his will, he will know about the teaching, whether it is from God or if I am speaking from myself. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Didn’t Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_20">20&#160;</span>The multitude answered, “You have a demon! Who seeks to kill you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“I did one work and you all marvel because of it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you circumcise a boy. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t judge according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said, “Isn’t this he whom they seek to kill? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_26">26&#160;</span>Behold, he speaks openly, and they say nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly the Christ? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_27">27&#160;</span>However, we know where this man comes from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_28">28&#160;</span>Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, <span class='wj'>“You both know me, and know where I am from. I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don’t know. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_30">30&#160;</span>They sought therefore to take him; but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_31">31&#160;</span>But of the multitude, many believed in him. They said, “When the Christ comes, he won’t do more signs than those which this man has done, will he?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_32">32&#160;</span>The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_33">33&#160;</span>Then Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“I will be with you a little while longer, then I go to him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will seek me and won’t find me. You can’t come where I am.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_35">35&#160;</span>The Jews therefore said among themselves, “Where will this man go that we won’t find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks and teach the Greeks? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_36">36&#160;</span>What is this word that he said, <span class='wj'>‘You will seek me, and won’t find me;’</span> and <span class='wj'>‘Where I am, you can’t come’</span>?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_37">37&#160;</span>Now on the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried out, <span class='wj'>“If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, from within him will flow rivers of living water.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_39">39&#160;</span>But he said this about the Spirit, which those believing in him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus wasn’t yet glorified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_40">40&#160;</span>Many of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said, “This is truly the prophet.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_41">41&#160;</span>Others said, “This is the Christ.” But some said, “What, does the Christ come out of Galilee? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_42">42&#160;</span>Hasn’t the Scripture said that the Christ comes of the offspring<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of David, <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> and from Bethlehem,<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> the village where David was?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_43">43&#160;</span>So a division arose in the multitude because of him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_44">44&#160;</span>Some of them would have arrested him, but no one laid hands on him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_45">45&#160;</span>The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said to them, “Why didn’t you bring him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_46">46&#160;</span>The officers answered, “No man ever spoke like this man!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_47">47&#160;</span>The Pharisees therefore answered them, “You aren’t also led astray, are you? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_48">48&#160;</span>Have any of the rulers or any of the Pharisees believed in him? 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_49">49&#160;</span>But this multitude that doesn’t know the law is cursed.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_50">50&#160;</span>Nicodemus (he who came to him by night, being one of them) said to them, 
<span class="verse" id="JN7_51">51&#160;</span>“Does our law judge a man unless it first hears from him personally and knows what he does?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_52">52&#160;</span>They answered him, “Are you also from Galilee? Search and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee.”<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN7_53">53&#160;</span>Everyone went to his own house,  
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN8_0'>8</div>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_1">1&#160;</span>but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_2">2&#160;</span>Now very early in the morning, he came again into the temple, and all the people came to him. He sat down and taught them. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_3">3&#160;</span>The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery. Having set her in the middle, 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_4">4&#160;</span>they told him, “Teacher, we found this woman in adultery, in the very act. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_5">5&#160;</span>Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone such women.<a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> What then do you say about her?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_6">6&#160;</span>They said this testing him, that they might have something to accuse him of. </div>
<div class='p'>But Jesus stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_7">7&#160;</span>But when they continued asking him, he looked up and said to them, <span class='wj'>“He who is without sin among you, let him throw the first stone at her.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_8">8&#160;</span>Again he stooped down and wrote on the ground with his finger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_9">9&#160;</span>They, when they heard it, being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the oldest, even to the last. Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in the middle. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus, standing up, saw her and said, <span class='wj'>“Woman, where are your accusers? Did no one condemn you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_11">11&#160;</span>She said, “No one, Lord.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Neither do I condemn you. Go your way. From now on, sin no more.”</span><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_12">12&#160;</span>Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them, saying, <span class='wj'>“I am the light of the world.</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>He who follows me will not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_13">13&#160;</span>The Pharisees therefore said to him, “You testify about yourself. Your testimony is not valid.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_14">14&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you don’t know where I came from, or where I am going. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You judge according to the flesh. I judge no one. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It’s also written in your law that the testimony of two people is valid.</span><a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am one who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_19">19&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “Where is your Father?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“You know neither me nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_20">20&#160;</span>Jesus spoke these words in the treasury, as he taught in the temple. Yet no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus said therefore again to them, <span class='wj'>“I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sins. Where I go, you can’t come.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_22">22&#160;</span>The Jews therefore said, “Will he kill himself, because he says, <span class='wj'>‘Where I am going, you can’t come’</span>?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_23">23&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“You are from beneath. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I said therefore to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you believe that I am</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>he, you will die in your sins.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_25">25&#160;</span>They said therefore to him, “Who are you?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Just what I have been saying to you from the beginning. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have many things to speak and to judge concerning you. However, he who sent me is true; and the things which I heard from him, these I say to the world.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_27">27&#160;</span>They didn’t understand that he spoke to them about the Father. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_28">28&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who sent me is with me. The Father hasn’t left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_30">30&#160;</span>As he spoke these things, many believed in him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_31">31&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him, <span class='wj'>“If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.” </span><a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_33">33&#160;</span>They answered him, “We are Abraham’s offspring, and have never been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, <span class='wj'>‘You will be made free’</span>?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A bondservant doesn’t live in the house forever. A son remains forever. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I know that you are Abraham’s offspring, yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I say the things which I have seen with my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_39">39&#160;</span>They answered him, “Our father is Abraham.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“If you were Abraham’s children, you would do the works of Abraham. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth which I heard from God. Abraham didn’t do this. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You do the works of your father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father, God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_42">42&#160;</span>Therefore Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“If God were your father, you would love me, for I came out and have come from God. For I haven’t come of myself, but he sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Why don’t you understand my speech? Because you can’t hear my word. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You are of your father the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and doesn’t stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his own; for he is a liar, and the father of lies. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But because I tell the truth, you don’t believe me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who is of God hears the words of God. For this cause you don’t hear, because you are not of God.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_48">48&#160;</span>Then the Jews answered him, “Don’t we say well that you are a Samaritan, and have a demon?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_49">49&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“I don’t have a demon, but I honor my Father and you dishonor me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I don’t seek my own glory. There is one who seeks and judges. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_51">51&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly, I tell you, if a person keeps my word, he will never see death.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_52">52&#160;</span>Then the Jews said to him, “Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham died, as did the prophets; and you say, <span class='wj'>‘If a man keeps my word, he will never taste of death.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_53">53&#160;</span>Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? The prophets died. Who do you make yourself out to be?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_54">54&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that he is our God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_55">55&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You have not known him, but I know him. If I said, ‘I don’t know him,’ I would be like you, a liar. But I know him and keep his word. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN8_56">56&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw it and was glad.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_57">57&#160;</span>The Jews therefore said to him, “You are not yet fifty years old! Have you seen Abraham?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_58">58&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you, before Abraham came into existence, I AM.</span><a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a><span class='wj'>”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN8_59">59&#160;</span>Therefore they took up stones to throw at him, but Jesus was hid himself and went out of the temple, having gone through the middle of them, and so passed by.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_1">1&#160;</span>As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_2">2&#160;</span>His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_3">3&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“This man didn’t sin, nor did his parents, but that the works of God might be revealed in him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I must work the works of him who sent me while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_6">6&#160;</span>When he had said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the blind man’s eyes with the mud, 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_7">7&#160;</span>and said to him, <span class='wj'>“Go, wash in the pool of Siloam”</span> (which means “Sent”). So he went away, washed, and came back seeing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore the neighbors and those who saw that he was blind before said, “Isn’t this he who sat and begged?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_9">9&#160;</span>Others were saying, “It is he.” Still others were saying, “He looks like him.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I am he.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_10">10&#160;</span>They therefore were asking him, “How were your eyes opened?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_11">11&#160;</span>He answered, “A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, <span class='wj'>‘Go to the pool of Siloam and wash.’</span> So I went away and washed, and I received sight.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_12">12&#160;</span>Then they asked him, “Where is he?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I don’t know.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_13">13&#160;</span>They brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_14">14&#160;</span>It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_15">15&#160;</span>Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. He said to them, “He put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_16">16&#160;</span>Some therefore of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, because he doesn’t keep the Sabbath.” </div>
<div class='p'>Others said, “How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?” So there was division among them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore they asked the blind man again, “What do you say about him, because he opened your eyes?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “He is a prophet.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_18">18&#160;</span>The Jews therefore didn’t believe concerning him, that he had been blind and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him who had received his sight, 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_19">19&#160;</span>and asked them, “Is this your son, whom you say was born blind? How then does he now see?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_20">20&#160;</span>His parents answered them, “We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind; 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_21">21&#160;</span>but how he now sees, we don’t know; or who opened his eyes, we don’t know. He is of age. Ask him. He will speak for himself.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_22">22&#160;</span>His parents said these things because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if any man would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_23">23&#160;</span>Therefore his parents said, “He is of age. Ask him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_24">24&#160;</span>So they called the man who was blind a second time, and said to him, “Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_25">25&#160;</span>He therefore answered, “I don’t know if he is a sinner. One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_26">26&#160;</span>They said to him again, “What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_27">27&#160;</span>He answered them, “I told you already, and you didn’t listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You don’t also want to become his disciples, do you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_28">28&#160;</span>They insulted him and said, “You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_29">29&#160;</span>We know that God has spoken to Moses. But as for this man, we don’t know where he comes from.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_30">30&#160;</span>The man answered them, “How amazing! You don’t know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_31">31&#160;</span>We know that God doesn’t listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshiper of God and does his will, he listens to him.<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_32">32&#160;</span>Since the world began it has never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind. 
<span class="verse" id="JN9_33">33&#160;</span>If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_34">34&#160;</span>They answered him, “You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?” Then they threw him out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, <span class='wj'>“Do you believe in the Son of God?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_36">36&#160;</span>He answered, “Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_37">37&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“You have both seen him, and it is he who speaks with you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_38">38&#160;</span>He said, “Lord, I believe!” and he worshiped him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_39">39&#160;</span>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“I came into this world for judgment, that those who don’t see may see; and that those who see may become blind.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_40">40&#160;</span>Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said to him, “Are we also blind?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN9_41">41&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now you say, ‘We see.’ Therefore your sin remains.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you, one who doesn’t enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other way, is a thief and a robber. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But one who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name and leads them out. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whenever he brings out his own sheep, he goes before them; and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They will by no means follow a stranger, but will flee from him; for they don’t know the voice of strangers.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_6">6&#160;</span>Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they didn’t understand what he was telling them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them again, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly, I tell you, I am the sheep’s door. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep didn’t listen to them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the door. If anyone enters in by me, he will be saved, and will go in and go out and will find pasture. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The thief only comes to steal, kill, and destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I am the good shepherd.</span><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who is a hired hand, and not a shepherd, who doesn’t own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep and scatters them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand and doesn’t care for the sheep. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the good shepherd. I know my own, and I’m known by my own; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>even as the Father knows me, and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have other sheep which are not of this fold.</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>I must bring them also, and they will hear my voice. They will become one flock with one shepherd. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, </span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>that I may take it again. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because of these words. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_20">20&#160;</span>Many of them said, “He has a demon and is insane! Why do you listen to him?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_21">21&#160;</span>Others said, “These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. It isn’t possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind, is it?”<a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_22">22&#160;</span>It was the Feast of the Dedication<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_23">23&#160;</span>It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon’s porch. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_24">24&#160;</span>The Jews therefore came around him and said to him, “How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_25">25&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“I told you, and you don’t believe. The works that I do in my Father’s name, these testify about me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you don’t believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I told you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I give eternal life to them. They will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>My Father who has given them to me is greater than all. No one is able to snatch them out of my Father’s hand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I and the Father are one.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_32">32&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_33">33&#160;</span>The Jews answered him, “We don’t stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Isn’t it written in your law, ‘I said, you are gods?’</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture can’t be broken), </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>do you say of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, ‘You blaspheme,’ because I said, ‘I am the Son of God?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I don’t do the works of my Father, don’t believe me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if I do them, though you don’t believe me, believe the works, that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN10_39">39&#160;</span>They sought again to seize him, and he went out of their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_40">40&#160;</span>He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was baptizing at first, and he stayed there. 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_41">41&#160;</span>Many came to him. They said, “John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is true.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN10_42">42&#160;</span>Many believed in him there.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_1">1&#160;</span>Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister, Martha. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_2">2&#160;</span>It was that Mary who had anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus, was sick. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_3">3&#160;</span>The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, “Lord, behold, he for whom you have great affection is sick.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_4">4&#160;</span>But when Jesus heard it, he said, <span class='wj'>“This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, that God’s Son may be glorified by it.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_5">5&#160;</span>Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_6">6&#160;</span>When therefore he heard that he was sick, he stayed two days in the place where he was. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_7">7&#160;</span>Then after this he said to the disciples, <span class='wj'>“Let’s go into Judea again.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_8">8&#160;</span>The disciples asked him, “Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you. Are you going there again?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_9">9&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“Aren’t there twelve hours of daylight? If a man walks in the day, he doesn’t stumble, because he sees the light of this world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if a man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light isn’t in him.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_11">11&#160;</span>He said these things, and after that, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Our friend Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_12">12&#160;</span>The disciples therefore said, “Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_13">13&#160;</span>Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_14">14&#160;</span>So Jesus said to them plainly then, <span class='wj'>“Lazarus is dead. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let’s go to him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_16">16&#160;</span>Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus,<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> said to his fellow disciples, “Let’s also go, that we may die with him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_17">17&#160;</span>So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the tomb four days already. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_18">18&#160;</span>Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> away. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_19">19&#160;</span>Many of the Jews had joined the women around Martha and Mary, to console them concerning their brother. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_20">20&#160;</span>Then when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore Martha said to Jesus, “Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn’t have died. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_22">22&#160;</span>Even now I know that whatever you ask of God, God will give you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Your brother will rise again.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_24">24&#160;</span>Martha said to him, “I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_25">25&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will still live, even if he dies. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_27">27&#160;</span>She said to him, “Yes, Lord. I have come to believe that you are the Christ, God’s Son, he who comes into the world.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_28">28&#160;</span>When she had said this, she went away and called Mary, her sister, secretly, saying, “The Teacher is here and is calling you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_29">29&#160;</span>When she heard this, she arose quickly and went to him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_30">30&#160;</span>Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha met him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_31">31&#160;</span>Then the Jews who were with her in the house and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying, “She is going to the tomb to weep there.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_32">32&#160;</span>Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, “Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn’t have died.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_33">33&#160;</span>When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit and was troubled, 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_34">34&#160;</span>and said, <span class='wj'>“Where have you laid him?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They told him, “Lord, come and see.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus wept. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_36">36&#160;</span>The Jews therefore said, “See how much affection he had for him!” 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_37">37&#160;</span>Some of them said, “Couldn’t this man, who opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also kept this man from dying?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_38">38&#160;</span>Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_39">39&#160;</span>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Take away the stone.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, “Lord, by this time there is a stench, for he has been dead four days.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_40">40&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Didn’t I tell you that if you believed, you would see God’s glory?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_41">41&#160;</span>So they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying.<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Jesus lifted up his eyes and said, <span class='wj'>“Father, I thank you that you listened to me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I know that you always listen to me, but because of the multitude standing around I said this, that they may believe that you sent me.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_43">43&#160;</span>When he had said this, he cried with a loud voice, <span class='wj'>“Lazarus, come out!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_44">44&#160;</span>He who was dead came out, bound hand and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth. </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Free him, and let him go.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_45">45&#160;</span>Therefore many of the Jews who came to Mary and saw what Jesus did believed in him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_46">46&#160;</span>But some of them went away to the Pharisees and told them the things which Jesus had done. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_47">47&#160;</span>The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, “What are we doing? For this man does many signs. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_48">48&#160;</span>If we leave him alone like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_49">49&#160;</span>But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, “You know nothing at all, 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_50">50&#160;</span>nor do you consider that it is advantageous for us that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation not perish.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_51">51&#160;</span>Now he didn’t say this of himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation, 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_52">52&#160;</span>and not for the nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_53">53&#160;</span>So from that day forward they took counsel that they might put him to death. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_54">54&#160;</span>Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but departed from there into the country near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim. He stayed there with his disciples. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN11_55">55&#160;</span>Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand. Many went up from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover, to purify themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_56">56&#160;</span>Then they sought for Jesus and spoke with one another as they stood in the temple, “What do you think—that he isn’t coming to the feast at all?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN11_57">57&#160;</span>Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should report it, that they might seize him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_1">1&#160;</span>Then, six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_2">2&#160;</span>So they made him a supper there. Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore Mary took a pound<a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of ointment of pure nard, very precious, and anointed Jesus’s feet and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_4">4&#160;</span>Then Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, one of his disciples, who would betray him, said, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_5">5&#160;</span>“Why wasn’t this ointment sold for three hundred denarii<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> and given to the poor?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_6">6&#160;</span>Now he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used to steal what was put into it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_7">7&#160;</span>But Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Leave her alone. She has kept this for the day of my burial. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For you always have the poor with you, but you don’t always have me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_9">9&#160;</span>A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there; and they came, not for Jesus’ sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_10">10&#160;</span>But the chief priests conspired to put Lazarus to death also, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_11">11&#160;</span>because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_12">12&#160;</span>On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast. When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_13">13&#160;</span>they took the branches of the palm trees and went out to meet him, and cried out, “Hosanna!<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord,<a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> the King of Israel!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_14">14&#160;</span>Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it. As it is written, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_15">15&#160;</span>“Don’t be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, your King comes, sitting on a donkey’s colt.”<a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_16">16&#160;</span>His disciples didn’t understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him, and that they had done these things to him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_17">17&#160;</span>The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb and raised him from the dead was testifying about it. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_18">18&#160;</span>For this cause also the multitude went and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_19">19&#160;</span>The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, “See how you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_20">20&#160;</span>Now there were certain Greeks among those who went up to worship at the feast. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore, these came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, “Sir, we want to see Jesus.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_22">22&#160;</span>Philip came and told Andrew, and in turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who loves his life will lose it. He who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone serves me, let him follow me. Where I am, there my servant will also be. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Now my soul is troubled. What shall I say? ‘Father, save me from this time?’ But I came to this time for this cause. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Father, glorify your name!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Then a voice came out of the sky, saying, “I have both glorified it and will glorify it again.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_29">29&#160;</span>Therefore the multitude who stood by and heard it said that it had thundered. Others said, “An angel has spoken to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_30">30&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“This voice hasn’t come for my sake, but for your sakes. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Now is the judgment of this world. Now the prince of this world will be cast out. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_33">33&#160;</span>But he said this, signifying by what kind of death he should die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_34">34&#160;</span>The multitude answered him, “We have heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever.<a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> How do you say, <span class='wj'>‘The Son of Man must be lifted up?’</span> Who is this Son of Man?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“Yet a little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness doesn’t overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn’t know where he is going. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become children of light.”</span> Jesus said these things, and he departed and hid himself from them. 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_37">37&#160;</span>But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they didn’t believe in him, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_38">38&#160;</span>that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke: </div>
<div class='q'>“Lord, who has believed our report? </div>
<div class='q2'>To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?”<a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_39">39&#160;</span>For this cause they couldn’t believe, for Isaiah said again: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_40">40&#160;</span>“He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest they should see with their eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and perceive with their heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and would turn, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I would heal them.”<a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_41">41&#160;</span>Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and spoke of him. <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_42">42&#160;</span>Nevertheless, even many of the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn’t confess it, so that they wouldn’t be put out of the synagogue, 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_43">43&#160;</span>for they loved men’s praise more than God’s praise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN12_44">44&#160;</span>Jesus cried out and said, <span class='wj'>“Whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who sees me sees him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone listens to my sayings and doesn’t believe, I don’t judge him. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who rejects me, and doesn’t receive my sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke will judge him in the last day. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I spoke not from myself, but the Father who sent me gave me a commandment, what I should say and what I should speak. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN12_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I know that his commandment is eternal life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to me, so I speak.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_1">1&#160;</span>Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that his time had come that he would depart from this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_2">2&#160;</span>During supper, the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon’s son, to betray him, 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_3">3&#160;</span>Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came from God and was going to God, 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_4">4&#160;</span>arose from supper, and laid aside his outer garments. He took a towel and wrapped a towel around his waist. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_5">5&#160;</span>Then he poured water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples’ feet and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_6">6&#160;</span>Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him, “Lord, do you wash my feet?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“You don’t know what I am doing now, but you will understand later.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_8">8&#160;</span>Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet!” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“If I don’t wash you, you have no part with me.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_9">9&#160;</span>Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Someone who has bathed only needs to have his feet washed, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not all of you.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_11">11&#160;</span>For he knew him who would betray him; therefore he said, <span class='wj'>“You are not all clean.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_12">12&#160;</span>So when he had washed their feet, put his outer garment back on, and sat down again, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Do you know what I have done to you? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You call me, ‘Teacher’ and ‘Lord.’ You say so correctly, for so I am. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another’s feet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I have given you an example, that you should also do as I have done to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, a servant is not greater than his lord, neither is one who is sent greater than he who sent him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I don’t speak concerning all of you. I know whom I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, ‘He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.’</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>From now on, I tell you before it happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I am he. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, he who receives whomever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives him who sent me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_21">21&#160;</span>When Jesus had said this, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_22">22&#160;</span>The disciples looked at one another, perplexed about whom he spoke. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_23">23&#160;</span>One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was at the table, leaning against Jesus’ breast. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_24">24&#160;</span>Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, and said to him, “Tell us who it is of whom he speaks.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_25">25&#160;</span>He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus’ breast, asked him, “Lord, who is it?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_26">26&#160;</span>Jesus therefore answered, <span class='wj'>“It is he to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it.”</span> So when he had dipped the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_27">27&#160;</span>After the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. </div>
<div class='p'>Then Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“What you do, do quickly.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_28">28&#160;</span>Now nobody at the table knew why he said this to him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_29">29&#160;</span>For some thought, because Judas had the money box, that Jesus said to him, “Buy what things we need for the feast,” or that he should give something to the poor. 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore having received that morsel, he went out immediately. It was night. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_31">31&#160;</span>When he had gone out, Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Now the Son of Man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If God has been glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him immediately. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Little children, I will be with you a little while longer. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, ‘Where I am going, you can’t come,’ so now I tell you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another. Just as I have loved you, you also love one another. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN13_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_36">36&#160;</span>Simon Peter said to him, “Lord, where are you going?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“Where I am going, you can’t follow now, but you will follow afterwards.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_37">37&#160;</span>Peter said to him, “Lord, why can’t I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN13_38">38&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Will you lay down your life for me? Most certainly I tell you, the rooster won’t crow until you have denied me three times.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t let your heart be troubled. Believe in God. Believe also in me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In my Father’s house are many homes. If it weren’t so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place for you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You know where I go, and you know the way.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_5">5&#160;</span>Thomas said to him, “Lord, we don’t know where you are going. How can we know the way?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_6">6&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father, except through me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on, you know him and have seen him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_8">8&#160;</span>Philip said to him, “Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_9">9&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Have I been with you such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. How do you say, ‘Show us the Father?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t you believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I tell you, I speak not from myself; but the Father who lives in me does his works. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works’ sake. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, he will do also; and he will do greater works than these, because I am going to my Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whatever you will ask in my name, I will do it, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you will ask anything in my name, I will do it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you love me, keep my commandments. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I will pray to the Father, and he will give you another Counselor, </span><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>that he may be with you forever:</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the Spirit of truth, whom the world can’t receive, for it doesn’t see him and doesn’t know him. You know him, for he lives with you and will be in you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I will not leave you orphans. I will come to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Yet a little while, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you will live also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>One who has my commandments and keeps them, that person is one who loves me. One who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will reveal myself to him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_22">22&#160;</span>Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, “Lord, what has happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“If a man loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who doesn’t love me doesn’t keep my words. The word which you hear isn’t mine, but the Father’s who sent me. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN14_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I have said these things to you while still living with you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, will teach you all things, and will remind you of all that I said to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you; not as the world gives, I give to you. Don’t let your heart be troubled, neither let it be fearful. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You heard how I told you, ‘I am going away, and I will come back to you.’ If you loved me, you would have rejoiced because I said ‘I am going to my Father;’ for the Father is greater than I. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Now I have told you before it happens so that when it happens, you may believe. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I will no more speak much with you, for the prince of the world comes, and he has nothing in me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN14_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do. Arise, let’s go from here.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN15_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Every branch in me that doesn’t bear fruit, he takes away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it may bear more fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You are already pruned clean because of the word which I have spoken to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch can’t bear fruit by itself unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the vine. You are the branches. He who remains in me and I in him bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If a man doesn’t remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch and is withered; and they gather them, throw them into the fire, and they are burned. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you remain in me, and my words remain in you, you will ask whatever you desire, and it will be done for you.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN15_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“In this my Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit; and so you will be my disciples. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love, even as I have kept my Father’s commandments and remain in his love. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have spoken these things to you, that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN15_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“This is my commandment, that you love one another, even as I have loved you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You are my friends if you do whatever I command you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No longer do I call you servants, for the servant doesn’t know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, for everything that I heard from my Father, I have made known to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You didn’t choose me, but I chose you and appointed you, that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever you will ask of the Father in my name, he may give it to you.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN15_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I command these things to you, that you may love one another. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world, since I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Remember the word that I said to you: ‘A servant is not greater than his lord.’</span><a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will also keep yours. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But they will do all these things to you for my name’s sake, because they don’t know him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who hates me, hates my Father also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I hadn’t done among them the works which no one else did, they wouldn’t have had sin. But now they have seen and also hated both me and my Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But this happened so that the word may be fulfilled which was written in their law, ‘They hated me without a cause.’</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN15_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When the Counselor</span><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>has come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN15_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I have said these things to you so that you wouldn’t be caused to stumble. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They will put you out of the synagogues. Yes, the time is coming that whoever kills you will think that he offers service to God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They will do these things</span><a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>because they have not known the Father nor me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I have told you these things so that when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about them. I didn’t tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, ‘Where are you going?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But because I have told you these things, sorrow has filled your heart. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is to your advantage that I go away; for if I don’t go away, the Counselor won’t come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When he has come, he will convict the world about sin, about righteousness, and about judgment; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>about sin, because they don’t believe in me; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>about righteousness, because I am going to my Father, and you won’t see me any more; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>about judgment, because the prince of this world has been judged. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I still have many things to tell you, but you can’t bear them now. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>However, when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from himself; but whatever he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you things that are coming. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He will glorify me, for he will take from what is mine and will declare it to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All things that the Father has are mine; therefore I said that he takes</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>of mine and will declare it to you. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“A little while, and you will not see me. Again a little while, and you will see me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_17">17&#160;</span>Some of his disciples therefore said to one another, “What is this that he says to us, <span class='wj'>‘A little while, and you won’t see me, and again a little while, and you will see me;’</span> and, <span class='wj'>‘Because I go to the Father’</span>?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_18">18&#160;</span>They said therefore, “What is this that he says, <span class='wj'>‘A little while’</span>? We don’t know what he is saying.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_19">19&#160;</span>Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, ‘A little while, and you won’t see me, and again a little while, and you will see me?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A woman, when she gives birth, has sorrow because her time has come. But when she has delivered the child, she doesn’t remember the anguish any more, for the joy that a human being is born into the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore you now have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“In that day you will ask me no questions. Most certainly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Until now, you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech. But the time is coming when I will no more speak to you in figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In that day you will ask in my name; and I don’t say to you that I will pray to the Father for you, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came from God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I came from the Father and have come into the world. Again, I leave the world and go to the Father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_29">29&#160;</span>His disciples said to him, “Behold, now you are speaking plainly, and using no figures of speech. 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_30">30&#160;</span>Now we know that you know all things, and don’t need for anyone to question you. By this we believe that you came from God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN16_31">31&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Do you now believe? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Behold, the time is coming, yes, and has now come, that you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN16_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have told you these things, that in me you may have peace. In the world you have trouble; but cheer up! I have overcome the world.” </span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN17_1">1&#160;</span>Jesus said these things, then lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, <span class='wj'>“Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may also glorify you; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>even as you gave him authority over all flesh, so he will give eternal life to all whom you have given him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I glorified you on the earth. I have accomplished the work which you have given me to do. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Now, Father, glorify me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN17_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I revealed your name to the people whom you have given me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me. They have kept your word. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Now they have known that all things whatever you have given me are from you, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for the words which you have given me I have given to them; and they received them, and knew for sure that I came from you. They have believed that you sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I pray for them. I don’t pray for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All things that are mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them through your name which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>While I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name. I have kept those whom you have given me. None of them is lost except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But now I come to you, and I say these things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I have given them your word. The world hated them because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I pray not that you would take them from the world, but that you would keep them from the evil one. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Sanctify them in your truth. Your word is truth.</span><a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As you sent me into the world, even so I have sent them into the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN17_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Not for these only do I pray, but for those also who will believe in me through their word, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that you sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The glory which you have given me, I have given to them, that they may be one, even as we are one, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I in them, and you in me, that they may be perfected into one, that the world may know that you sent me and loved them, even as you loved me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Father, I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where I am, that they may see my glory which you have given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the world. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Righteous Father, the world hasn’t known you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN17_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I made known to them your name, and will make it known; that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in them.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_1">1&#160;</span>When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples over the brook Kidron, where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_2">2&#160;</span>Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_3">3&#160;</span>Judas then, having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus therefore, knowing all the things that were happening to him, went out and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Who are you looking for?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_5">5&#160;</span>They answered him, “Jesus of Nazareth.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“I am he.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_6">6&#160;</span>When therefore he said to them, <span class='wj'>“I am he,”</span> they went backward and fell to the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_7">7&#160;</span>Again therefore he asked them, <span class='wj'>“Who are you looking for?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Jesus of Nazareth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_8">8&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“I told you that I am he. If therefore you seek me, let these go their way,”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_9">9&#160;</span>that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, <span class='wj'>“Of those whom you have given me, I have lost none.”</span><a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_10">10&#160;</span>Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, struck the high priest’s servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant’s name was Malchus. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_11">11&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to Peter, <span class='wj'>“Put the sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not surely drink it?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_12">12&#160;</span>So the detachment, the commanding officer, and the officers of the Jews seized Jesus and bound him, 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_13">13&#160;</span>and led him to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_14">14&#160;</span>Now it was Caiaphas who advised the Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_15">15&#160;</span>Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did another disciple. Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest; 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_16">16&#160;</span>but Peter was standing at the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and brought in Peter. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_17">17&#160;</span>Then the maid who kept the door said to Peter, “Are you also one of this man’s disciples?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “I am not.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_18">18&#160;</span>Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were warming themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_19">19&#160;</span>The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples and about his teaching. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_20">20&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“I spoke openly to the world. I always taught in synagogues and in the temple, where the Jews always meet. I said nothing in secret. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them. Behold, they know the things which I said.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_22">22&#160;</span>When he had said this, one of the officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, “Do you answer the high priest like that?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“If I have spoken evil, testify of the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_24">24&#160;</span>Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_25">25&#160;</span>Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said therefore to him, “You aren’t also one of his disciples, are you?” </div>
<div class='p'>He denied it and said, “I am not.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_26">26&#160;</span>One of the servants of the high priest, being a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, “Didn’t I see you in the garden with him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_27">27&#160;</span>Peter therefore denied it again, and immediately the rooster crowed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_28">28&#160;</span>They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn’t enter into the Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_29">29&#160;</span>Pilate therefore went out to them and said, “What accusation do you bring against this man?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_30">30&#160;</span>They answered him, “If this man weren’t an evildoer, we wouldn’t have delivered him up to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_31">31&#160;</span>Pilate therefore said to them, “Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law.” </div>
<div class='p'>Therefore the Jews said to him, “It is illegal for us to put anyone to death,” 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_32">32&#160;</span>that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should die. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_33">33&#160;</span>Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, called Jesus, and said to him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Do you say this by yourself, or did others tell you about me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_35">35&#160;</span>Pilate answered, “I’m not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you done?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_36">36&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“My Kingdom is not of this world. If my Kingdom were of this world, then my servants would fight, that I wouldn’t be delivered to the Jews. But now my Kingdom is not from here.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_37">37&#160;</span>Pilate therefore said to him, “Are you a king then?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“You say that I am a king. For this reason I have been born, and for this reason I have come into the world, that I should testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_38">38&#160;</span>Pilate said to him, “What is truth?” </div>
<div class='p'>When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them, “I find no basis for a charge against him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN18_39">39&#160;</span>But you have a custom that I should release someone to you at the Passover. Therefore, do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN18_40">40&#160;</span>Then they all shouted again, saying, “Not this man, but Barabbas!” Now Barabbas was a robber.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_1">1&#160;</span>So Pilate then took Jesus and flogged him. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_2">2&#160;</span>The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown and put it on his head, and dressed him in a purple garment. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_3">3&#160;</span>They kept saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” and they kept slapping him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_4">4&#160;</span>Then Pilate went out again, and said to them, “Behold, I bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to them, “Behold, the man!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_6">6&#160;</span>When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted, saying, “Crucify! Crucify!” </div>
<div class='p'>Pilate said to them, “Take him yourselves and crucify him, for I find no basis for a charge against him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_7">7&#160;</span>The Jews answered him, “We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_8">8&#160;</span>When therefore Pilate heard this saying, he was more afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_9">9&#160;</span>He entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, “Where are you from?” But Jesus gave him no answer. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_10">10&#160;</span>Pilate therefore said to him, “Aren’t you speaking to me? Don’t you know that I have power to release you and have power to crucify you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_11">11&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“You would have no power at all against me, unless it were given to you from above. Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_12">12&#160;</span>At this, Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, “If you release this man, you aren’t Caesar’s friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_13">13&#160;</span>When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called “The Pavement”, but in Hebrew, “Gabbatha.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_14">14&#160;</span>Now it was the Preparation Day of the Passover, at about the sixth hour.<a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> He said to the Jews, “Behold, your King!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_15">15&#160;</span>They cried out, “Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!” </div>
<div class='p'>Pilate said to them, “Shall I crucify your King?” </div>
<div class='p'>The chief priests answered, “We have no king but Caesar!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_16">16&#160;</span>So then he delivered him to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_17">17&#160;</span>He went out, bearing his cross, to the place called “The Place of a Skull”, which is called in Hebrew, “Golgotha”, 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_18">18&#160;</span>where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_19">19&#160;</span>Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. There was written, “JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_21">21&#160;</span>The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, “Don’t write, ‘The King of the Jews,’ but, ‘he said, “I am King of the Jews.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_22">22&#160;</span>Pilate answered, “What I have written, I have written.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_23">23&#160;</span>Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the tunic. Now the tunic was without seam, woven from the top throughout. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_24">24&#160;</span>Then they said to one another, “Let’s not tear it, but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be,” that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, </div>
<div class='q'>“They parted my garments among them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They cast lots for my clothing.”<a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='m'>Therefore the soldiers did these things. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_25">25&#160;</span>But standing by Jesus’ cross were his mother, his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_26">26&#160;</span>Therefore when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, <span class='wj'>“Woman, behold, your son!” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_27">27&#160;</span>Then he said to the disciple, <span class='wj'>“Behold, your mother!”</span> From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_28">28&#160;</span>After this, Jesus, seeing<a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> that all things were now finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, <span class='wj'>“I am thirsty!”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_29">29&#160;</span>Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and held it at his mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_30">30&#160;</span>When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, <span class='wj'>“It is finished!”</span> Then he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation Day, so that the bodies wouldn’t remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken and that they might be taken away. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_32">32&#160;</span>Therefore the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and of the other who was crucified with him; 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_33">33&#160;</span>but when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead, they didn’t break his legs. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_34">34&#160;</span>However, one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_35">35&#160;</span>He who has seen has testified, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, that you may believe. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_36">36&#160;</span>For these things happened that the Scripture might be fulfilled, “A bone of him will not be broken.”<a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_37">37&#160;</span>Again another Scripture says, “They will look on him whom they pierced.”<a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN19_38">38&#160;</span>After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus’ body. Pilate gave him permission. He came therefore and took away his body. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_39">39&#160;</span>Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus by night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred Roman pounds.<a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_40">40&#160;</span>So they took Jesus’ body, and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_41">41&#160;</span>Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden. In the garden was a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid. 
<span class="verse" id="JN19_42">42&#160;</span>Then, because of the Jews’ Preparation Day (for the tomb was near at hand), they laid Jesus there.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_1">1&#160;</span>Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went early, while it was still dark, to the tomb, and saw that the stone had been taken away from the tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, “They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don’t know where they have laid him!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore Peter and the other disciple went out, and they went toward the tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_4">4&#160;</span>They both ran together. The other disciple outran Peter and came to the tomb first. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_5">5&#160;</span>Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen cloths lying there; yet he didn’t enter in. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_6">6&#160;</span>Then Simon Peter came, following him, and entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying, 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_7">7&#160;</span>and the cloth that had been on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_8">8&#160;</span>So then the other disciple who came first to the tomb also entered in, and he saw and believed. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_9">9&#160;</span>For as yet they didn’t know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_10">10&#160;</span>So the disciples went away again to their own homes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_11">11&#160;</span>But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping. So as she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb, 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_12">12&#160;</span>and she saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_13">13&#160;</span>They asked her, “Woman, why are you weeping?” </div>
<div class='p'>She said to them, “Because they have taken away my Lord, and I don’t know where they have laid him.” 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_14">14&#160;</span>When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing, and didn’t know that it was Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_15">15&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>She, supposing him to be the gardener, said to him, “Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_16">16&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Mary.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>She turned and said to him, “Rabboni!”<a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> which is to say, “Teacher!”<a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Don’t hold me, for I haven’t yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers and tell them, ‘I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.’ ”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_18">18&#160;</span>Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_19">19&#160;</span>When therefore it was evening on that day, the first day of the week, and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the middle and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Peace be to you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_20">20&#160;</span>When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them again, <span class='wj'>“Peace be to you. As the Father has sent me, even so I send you.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_22">22&#160;</span>When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Receive the Holy Spirit! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you forgive anyone’s sins, they have been forgiven them. If you retain anyone’s sins, they have been retained.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_24">24&#160;</span>But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus,<a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> wasn’t with them when Jesus came. 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_25">25&#160;</span>The other disciples therefore said to him, “We have seen the Lord!” </div>
<div class='p'>But he said to them, “Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, put my finger into the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_26">26&#160;</span>After eight days, again his disciples were inside and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, the doors being locked, and stood in the middle, and said, <span class='wj'>“Peace be to you.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_27">27&#160;</span>Then he said to Thomas, <span class='wj'>“Reach here your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your hand, and put it into my side. Don’t be unbelieving, but believing.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_28">28&#160;</span>Thomas answered him, “My Lord and my God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Because you have seen me,</span><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN20_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book; 
<span class="verse" id="JN20_31">31&#160;</span>but these are written that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JN21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_1">1&#160;</span>After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself this way. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_2">2&#160;</span>Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus,<a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_3">3&#160;</span>Simon Peter said to them, “I’m going fishing.” </div>
<div class='p'>They told him, “We are also coming with you.” They immediately went out and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_4">4&#160;</span>But when day had already come, Jesus stood on the beach; yet the disciples didn’t know that it was Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus therefore said to them, <span class='wj'>“Children, have you anything to eat?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>They answered him, “No.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_6">6&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They cast it therefore, and now they weren’t able to draw it in for the multitude of fish. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_7">7&#160;</span>That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter, “It’s the Lord!” </div>
<div class='p'>So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his coat around himself (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_8">8&#160;</span>But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits<a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> away), dragging the net full of fish. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_9">9&#160;</span>So when they got out on the land, they saw a fire of coals there, with fish and bread laid on it. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_10">10&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Bring some of the fish which you have just caught.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_11">11&#160;</span>Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of one hundred fifty-three great fish. Even though there were so many, the net wasn’t torn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_12">12&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Come and eat breakfast!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>None of the disciples dared inquire of him, “Who are you?” knowing that it was the Lord. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_13">13&#160;</span>Then Jesus came and took the bread, gave it to them, and the fish likewise. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_14">14&#160;</span>This is now the third time that Jesus was revealed to his disciples after he had risen from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_15">15&#160;</span>So when they had eaten their breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, <span class='wj'>“Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Feed my lambs.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_16">16&#160;</span>He said to him again a second time, <span class='wj'>“Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Tend my sheep.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_17">17&#160;</span>He said to him the third time, <span class='wj'>“Simon, son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time, <span class='wj'>“Do you have affection for me?”</span> He said to him, “Lord, you know everything. You know that I have affection for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Feed my sheep. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself and walked where you wanted to. But when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you and carry you where you don’t want to go.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_19">19&#160;</span>Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to him, <span class='wj'>“Follow me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_20">20&#160;</span>Then Peter, turning around, saw a disciple following. This was the disciple whom Jesus loved, the one who had also leaned on Jesus’ breast at the supper and asked, “Lord, who is going to betray you?” 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_21">21&#160;</span>Peter, seeing him, said to Jesus, “Lord, what about this man?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_22">22&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you? You follow me.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_23">23&#160;</span>This saying therefore went out among the brothers<a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> that this disciple wouldn’t die. Yet Jesus didn’t say to him that he wouldn’t die, but, <span class='wj'>“If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JN21_24">24&#160;</span>This is the disciple who testifies about these things, and wrote these things. We know that his witness is true. 
<span class="verse" id="JN21_25">25&#160;</span>There are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they would all be written, I suppose that even the world itself wouldn’t have room for the books that would be written. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:5</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “overcome” (κατέλαβεν) can also be translated “comprehended.” It refers to getting a grip on an enemy to defeat him. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:14</a>
 <span class="ft">The phrase “only born” is from the Greek word “μονογενους”, which is sometimes translated “only begotten” or “one and only”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:17</a>
 <span class="ft">“Christ” means “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_18"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:18</a>
 <span class="ft">The phrase “only born” is from the Greek word “μονογενη”, which is sometimes translated “only begotten” or “one and only”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:18</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “God”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_23"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:23</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>Isaiah 40:3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:29</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “ἰδοὺ”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_39"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:39</a>
 <span class="ft">4:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_41"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:41</a>
 <span class="ft">“Messiah” (Hebrew) and “Christ” (Greek) both mean “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN1_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:42</a>
 <span class="ft">“Cephas” (Aramaic) and “Peter” (Greek) both mean “Rock”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN2_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:6</a>
 <span class="ft">2 to 3 metretes is about 20 to 30 U. S. Gallons, or 75 to 115 liters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN2_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_9'>Psalm 69:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN3_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:3</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “anew” here and in <a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN3_7'>John 3:7</a> (ἄνωθεν) also means “again” and “from above”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN3_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:8</a>
 <span class="ft">The same Greek word (πνεῦμα) means wind, breath, and spirit.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN3_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3:16</a>
 <span class="ft">The phrase “only born” is from the Greek word “μονογενη”, which is sometimes translated “only begotten” or “one and only”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN3_36"><span class="notemark">§</span> 3:36</a>
 <span class="ft">The same word can be translated “disobeys” or “disbelieves” in this context.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN4_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:6</a>
 <span class="ft">noon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN4_25"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:25</a>
 <span class="ft">“Messiah” (Hebrew) and “Christ” (Greek) both mean “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN4_52"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4:52</a>
 <span class="ft">1:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN5_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:4</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits from “waiting” in verse 3 to the end of verse 4.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:7</a>
 <span class="ft">A denarius was a silver coin worth about a day’s wages for an agricultural laborer, so 200 denarii would be between 6 and 7 month’s pay.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6:19</a>
 <span class="ft">25 to 30 stadia is about 5 to 6 kilometers or about 3 to 4 miles</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_19"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 6:19</a>
 <span class="xt">See <a class='bibleref' href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_8'>Job 9:8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6:20</a>
 <span class="ft">or, I AM</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_31"><span class="notemark">§</span> 6:31</a>
 <span class="ft">Greek and Hebrew use the same word for “heaven”, “the heavens”, “the sky”, and “the air”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_31"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 6:31</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX16_4'>Exodus 16:4</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='NEH.xhtml#NH9_15'>Nehemiah 9:15</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_24'>Psalm 78:24-25</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN6_45"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 6:45</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_13'>Isaiah 54:13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN7_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:42</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN7_42"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:42</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='2SA.xhtml#S27_12'>2 Samuel 7:12</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN7_42"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:42</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='MIC.xhtml#MC5_2'>Micah 5:2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN7_52"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:52</a>
 <span class="xt">See <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>Isaiah 9:1</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_13'>Matthew 4:13-16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_10'>Leviticus 20:10</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT22_22'>Deuteronomy 22:22</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:11</a>
 <span class="ft">NU includes <a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN7_53'>John 7:53</a>–<a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN8_11'>John 8:11,</a> but puts brackets around it to indicate that the textual critics had less confidence that this was original.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_12"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:12</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_1'>Isaiah 60:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT17_6'>Deuteronomy 17:6</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_15'>19:15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8:24</a>
 <span class="ft">or, I AM</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_32"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:32</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_45'>Psalm 119:45</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN8_58"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:58</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_14'>Exodus 3:14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN9_31"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 9:31</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS66_18'>Psalm 66:18</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_29'>Proverbs 15:29</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_9'>28:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_11"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:11</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_11'>Isaiah 40:11</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='EZK.xhtml#EK34_11'>Ezekiel 34:11-12,15,22</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_16"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:16</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_8'>Isaiah 56:8</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_7'>Isaiah 53:7-8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_21"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:21</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX4_11'>Exodus 4:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:22</a>
 <span class="ft">The “Feast of the Dedication” is the Greek name for “Hanukkah”, a celebration of the rededication of the Temple.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN10_34"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:34</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS82_6'>Psalm 82:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN11_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:16</a>
 <span class="ft">“Didymus” means “Twin”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN11_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11:18</a>
 <span class="ft">15 stadia is about 2.8 kilometers or 1.7 miles</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN11_41"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 11:41</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “from the place where the dead man was lying.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:3</a>
 <span class="ft">a Roman pound of 12 ounces, or about 340 grams</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12:5</a>
 <span class="ft">300 denarii was about a year’s wages for an agricultural laborer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 12:13</a>
 <span class="ft">“Hosanna” means “save us” or “help us, we pray”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_13"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:13</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_25'>Psalm 118:25-26</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_15"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:15</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_9'>Zechariah 9:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_34"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:34</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_7'>Isaiah 9:7</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN2_44'>Daniel 2:44</a>; See <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_8'>Isaiah 53:8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_38"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:38</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_1'>Isaiah 53:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_40"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:40</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_10'>Isaiah 6:10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN12_41"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:41</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_1'>Isaiah 6:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN13_18"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:18</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS41_9'>Psalm 41:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN14_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Greek παρακλητον: Counselor, Helper, Intercessor, Advocate, and Comforter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN15_20"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:20</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN13_16'>John 13:16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN15_25"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:25</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS35_19'>Psalm 35:19</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS69_4'>69:4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN15_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:26</a>
 <span class="ft">Greek Parakletos: Counselor, Helper, Advocate, Intercessor, and Comforter.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN16_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:3</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “to you”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN16_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:15</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “will take” instead of “takes”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN17_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 17:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS119_142'>Psalm 119:142</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN18_9"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 18:9</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN6_39'>John 6:39</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:14</a>
 <span class="ft">“the sixth hour” would have been 6:00 a.m. according to the Roman timekeeping system, or noon for the Jewish timekeeping system in use, then. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_24"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:24</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_18'>Psalm 22:18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19:28</a>
 <span class="ft">NU, TR read “knowing” instead of “seeing” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_36"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:36</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX12_46'>Exodus 12:46</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='NUM.xhtml#NU9_12'>Numbers 9:12</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS34_20'>Psalm 34:20</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_37"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:37</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC12_10'>Zechariah 12:10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN19_39"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 19:39</a>
 <span class="ft">100 Roman pounds of 12 ounces each, or about 72 pounds, or 33 Kilograms.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN20_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Rabboni is a transliteration of the Hebrew word for “great teacher.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN20_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:16</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Master</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN20_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20:24</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Twin</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN20_29"><span class="notemark">§</span> 20:29</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “Thomas,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN21_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Twin</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN21_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21:8</a>
 <span class="ft">200 cubits is about 100 yards or about 91 meters</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JN21_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 21:23</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
