<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Matthew 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Matthew</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='MAT.xhtml#MT28_0'>28</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='MT0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Good News According to </div>
<div class='mt'>Matthew  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="MT1_1">1&#160;</span>The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the son of David, the son of Abraham. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_2">2&#160;</span>Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_3">3&#160;</span>Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of Ram. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_4">4&#160;</span>Ram became the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of Salmon. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_5">5&#160;</span>Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_6">6&#160;</span>Jesse became the father of King David. David became the father of Solomon by her who had been Uriah’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_7">7&#160;</span>Solomon became the father of Rehoboam. Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_8">8&#160;</span>Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of Uzziah. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_9">9&#160;</span>Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_10">10&#160;</span>Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh. Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_11">11&#160;</span>Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_12">12&#160;</span>After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_13">13&#160;</span>Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_14">14&#160;</span>Azor became the father of Zadok. Zadok became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_15">15&#160;</span>Eliud became the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_16">16&#160;</span>Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus,<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> who is called Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_17">17&#160;</span>So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_18">18&#160;</span>Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this: After his mother, Mary, was engaged to Joseph, before they came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_19">19&#160;</span>Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her away secretly. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_20">20&#160;</span>But when he thought about these things, behold,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, “Joseph, son of David, don’t be afraid to take to yourself Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_21">21&#160;</span>She shall give birth to a son. You shall name him Jesus,<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> for it is he who shall save his people from their sins.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_22">22&#160;</span>Now all this has happened that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_23">23&#160;</span>“Behold, the virgin shall be with child, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shall give birth to a son. </div>
<div class='q'>They shall call his name Immanuel,” </div>
<div class='q2'>which is, being interpreted, “God with us.”<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT1_24">24&#160;</span>Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself; 
<span class="verse" id="MT1_25">25&#160;</span>and didn’t know her sexually until she had given birth to her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_1">1&#160;</span>Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, wise men<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_2">2&#160;</span>“Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_3">3&#160;</span>When King Herod heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_4">4&#160;</span>Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_5">5&#160;</span>They said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea, for this is written through the prophet, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_6">6&#160;</span>‘You Bethlehem, land of Judah, </div>
<div class='q2'>are in no way least among the princes of Judah; </div>
<div class='q'>for out of you shall come a governor </div>
<div class='q2'>who shall shepherd my people, Israel.’ ”<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_7">7&#160;</span>Then Herod secretly called the wise men, and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_8">8&#160;</span>He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, “Go and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him, bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_9">9&#160;</span>They, having heard the king, went their way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them until it came and stood over where the young child was. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_10">10&#160;</span>When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_11">11&#160;</span>They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_12">12&#160;</span>Being warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_13">13&#160;</span>Now when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, “Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_14">14&#160;</span>He arose and took the young child and his mother by night and departed into Egypt, 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_15">15&#160;</span>and was there until the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, “Out of Egypt I called my son.”<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_16">16&#160;</span>Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent out and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_17">17&#160;</span>Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_18">18&#160;</span>“A voice was heard in Ramah, </div>
<div class='q2'>lamentation, weeping and great mourning, </div>
<div class='q'>Rachel weeping for her children; </div>
<div class='q2'>she wouldn’t be comforted, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they are no more.”<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_19">19&#160;</span>But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_20">20&#160;</span>“Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young child’s life are dead.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT2_21">21&#160;</span>He arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_22">22&#160;</span>But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of Galilee, 
<span class="verse" id="MT2_23">23&#160;</span>and came and lived in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets that he will be called a Nazarene.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_1">1&#160;</span>In those days, John the Baptizer came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_2">2&#160;</span>“Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!” 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_3">3&#160;</span>For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“The voice of one crying in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>make the way of the Lord ready! </div>
<div class='q2'>Make his paths straight!”<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_4">4&#160;</span>Now John himself wore clothing made of camel’s hair with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey. 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_5">5&#160;</span>Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea, and all the region around the Jordan went out to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_6">6&#160;</span>They were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_7">7&#160;</span>But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, “You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance! 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t think to yourselves, ‘We have Abraham for our father,’ for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones. 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_10">10&#160;</span>Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that doesn’t produce good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_11">11&#160;</span>“I indeed baptize you in water for repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_12">12&#160;</span>His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_13">13&#160;</span>Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to John, to be baptized by him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_14">14&#160;</span>But John would have hindered him, saying, “I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_15">15&#160;</span>But Jesus, answering, said to him, <span class='wj'>“Allow it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness.”</span> Then he allowed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT3_16">16&#160;</span>Jesus, when he was baptized, went up directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT3_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, a voice out of the heavens said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_1">1&#160;</span>Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_2">2&#160;</span>When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry afterward. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_3">3&#160;</span>The tempter came and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_4">4&#160;</span>But he answered, <span class='wj'>“It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of God’s mouth.’ ”</span><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_5">5&#160;</span>Then the devil took him into the holy city. He set him on the pinnacle of the temple, 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_6">6&#160;</span>and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, </div>
<div class='q'>‘He will command his angels concerning you,’ and, </div>
<div class='q'>‘On their hands they will bear you up, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that you don’t dash your foot against a stone.’ ”<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Again, it is written, ‘You shall not test the Lord, your God.’ ”</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_8">8&#160;</span>Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world and their glory. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_9">9&#160;</span>He said to him, “I will give you all of these things, if you will fall down and worship me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_10">10&#160;</span>Then Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Get behind me,</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>Satan! For it is written, ‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him only.’ ”</span> <a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_11">11&#160;</span>Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and served him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_12">12&#160;</span>Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_13">13&#160;</span>Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali, 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_14">14&#160;</span>that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_15">15&#160;</span>“The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, </div>
<div class='q2'>toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, </div>
<div class='q2'>Galilee of the Gentiles, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_16">16&#160;</span>the people who sat in darkness saw a great light; </div>
<div class='q2'>to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>to them light has dawned.”<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_17">17&#160;</span>From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say, <span class='wj'>“Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_18">18&#160;</span>Walking by the sea of Galilee, he<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> saw two brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_19">19&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Come after me, and I will make you fishers for men.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_20">20&#160;</span>They immediately left their nets and followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_21">21&#160;</span>Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_22">22&#160;</span>They immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT4_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_24">24&#160;</span>The report about him went out into all Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT4_25">25&#160;</span>Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea, and from beyond the Jordan followed him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_1">1&#160;</span>Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_2">2&#160;</span>He opened his mouth and taught them, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Blessed are the poor in spirit,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.</span><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are those who mourn,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall be comforted.</span><a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are the gentle,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall inherit the earth.</span><a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, </span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall be filled.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are the merciful,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall obtain mercy.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are the pure in heart,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall see God.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are the peacemakers,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for they shall be called children of God.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake, </span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Blessed are you when people reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for my sake. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill can’t be hidden. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Neither do you light a lamp and put it under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are in the house. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even so, let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets. I didn’t come to destroy, but to fulfill. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For most certainly, I tell you, until heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letter</span><a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>or one tiny pen stroke</span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are accomplished. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore, whoever shall break one of these least commandments and teach others to do so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You have heard that it was said to the ancient ones, ‘You shall not murder;’</span><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>and ‘Whoever murders will be in danger of the judgment.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause </span><a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>will be in danger of the judgment. Whoever says to his brother, ‘Raca!’ </span><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>will be in danger of the council. Whoever says, ‘You fool!’ will be in danger of the fire of Gehenna.</span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against you, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Agree with your adversary quickly while you are with him on the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, you shall by no means get out of there until you have paid the last penny.</span><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You have heard that it was said, </span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>‘You shall not commit adultery;’</span><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.</span><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off, and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“It was also said, ‘Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,’</span><a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but I tell you that whoever puts away his wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Again you have heard that it was said to the ancient ones, ‘You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to the Lord your vows,’</span><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but I tell you, don’t swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Neither shall you swear by your head, for you can’t make one hair white or black. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But let your ‘Yes’ be ‘Yes’ and your ‘No’ be ‘No.’ Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You have heard that it was said, ‘An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.’</span><a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you, don’t resist him who is evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone sues you to take away your coat, let him have your cloak also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Give to him who asks you, and don’t turn away him who desires to borrow from you.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT5_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You have heard that it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbor </span><a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>and hate your enemy.’</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Don’t even the tax collectors do the same? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you only greet your friends, what more do you do than others? Don’t even the tax collectors</span><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>do the same? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT5_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Be careful that you don’t do your charitable giving</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore, when you do merciful deeds, don’t sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But when you do merciful deeds, don’t let your left hand know what your right hand does, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>so that your merciful deeds may be in secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most certainly, I tell you, they have received their reward. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you, when you pray, enter into your inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In praying, don’t use vain repetitions as the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore don’t be like them, for your Father knows what things you need before you ask him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Pray like this: </span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>“ ‘Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy. </span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Let your Kingdom come. </span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>Let your will be done on earth as it is in heaven. </span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Give us today our daily bread. </span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Forgive us our debts,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>as we also forgive our debtors. </span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Bring us not into temptation,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>but deliver us from the evil one.</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen.’</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if you don’t forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Moreover when you fast, don’t be like the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces that they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you, when you fast, anoint your head and wash your face, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>so that you are not seen by men to be fasting, but by your Father who is in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don’t break through and steal; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness! </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You can’t serve both God and Mammon. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore I tell you, don’t be anxious for your life: what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for your body, what you will wear. Isn’t life more than food, and the body more than clothing? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>See the birds of the sky, that they don’t sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren’t you of much more value than they?</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Which of you by being anxious, can add one moment</span><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>to his lifespan? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don’t toil, neither do they spin, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today exists and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, won’t he much more clothe you, you of little faith?</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT6_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Therefore don’t be anxious, saying, ‘What will we eat?’, ‘What will we drink?’ or, ‘With what will we be clothed?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Gentiles seek after all these things; for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But seek first God’s Kingdom and his righteousness; and all these things will be given to you as well. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT6_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore don’t be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day’s own evil is sufficient.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t judge, so that you won’t be judged. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For with whatever judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but don’t consider the beam that is in your own eye? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or how will you tell your brother, ‘Let me remove the speck from your eye,’ and behold, the beam is in your own eye? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You hypocrite! First remove the beam out of your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of your brother’s eye.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t give that which is holy to the dogs, neither throw your pearls before the pigs, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and you will find. Knock, and it will be opened for you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or who is there among you who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or if he asks for a fish, who will give him a serpent? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore, whatever you desire for men to do to you, you shall also do to them; for this is the law and the prophets.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Enter in by the narrow gate; for the gate is wide and the way is broad that leads to destruction, and there are many who enter in by it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>How</span><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>narrow is the gate and the way is restricted that leads to life! There are few who find it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>By their fruits you will know them. Do you gather grapes from thorns or figs from thistles? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even so, every good tree produces good fruit, but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A good tree can’t produce evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Every tree that doesn’t grow good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore by their fruits you will know them. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Many will tell me in that day, ‘Lord, Lord, didn’t we prophesy in your name, in your name cast out demons, and in your name do many mighty works?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then I will tell them, ‘I never knew you. Depart from me, you who work iniquity.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Everyone therefore who hears these words of mine and does them, I will liken him to a wise man who built his house on a rock. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it didn’t fall, for it was founded on the rock. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Everyone who hears these words of mine and doesn’t do them will be like a foolish man who built his house on the sand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew and beat on that house; and it fell—and its fall was great.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT7_28">28&#160;</span>When Jesus had finished saying these things, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching, 
<span class="verse" id="MT7_29">29&#160;</span>for he taught them with authority, and not like the scribes.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_1">1&#160;</span>When he came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, a leper came to him and worshiped him, saying, “Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_3">3&#160;</span>Jesus stretched out his hand and touched him, saying, <span class='wj'>“I want to. Be made clean.”</span> Immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“See that you tell nobody; but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_5">5&#160;</span>When he came into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking him for help, 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_6">6&#160;</span>saying, “Lord, my servant lies in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“I will come and heal him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_8">8&#160;</span>The centurion answered, “Lord, I’m not worthy for you to come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant will be healed. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_9">9&#160;</span>For I am also a man under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and tell another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and tell my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_10">10&#160;</span>When Jesus heard it, he marveled and said to those who followed, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, I haven’t found so great a faith, not even in Israel. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I tell you that many will come from the east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but the children of the Kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness. There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_13">13&#160;</span>Jesus said to the centurion, <span class='wj'>“Go your way. Let it be done for you as you have believed.”</span> His servant was healed in that hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_14">14&#160;</span>When Jesus came into Peter’s house, he saw his wife’s mother lying sick with a fever. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_15">15&#160;</span>He touched her hand, and the fever left her. So she got up and served him.<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_16">16&#160;</span>When evening came, they brought to him many possessed with demons. He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick, 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_17">17&#160;</span>that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, “He took our infirmities and bore our diseases.”<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_18">18&#160;</span>Now when Jesus saw great multitudes around him, he gave the order to depart to the other side. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_19">19&#160;</span>A scribe came and said to him, “Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_20">20&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“The foxes have holes and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_21">21&#160;</span>Another of his disciples said to him, “Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_22">22&#160;</span>But Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_23">23&#160;</span>When he got into a boat, his disciples followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, a violent storm came up on the sea, so much that the boat was covered with the waves; but he was asleep. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_25">25&#160;</span>The disciples came to him and woke him up, saying, “Save us, Lord! We are dying!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_26">26&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why are you fearful, O you of little faith?” </span> Then he got up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_27">27&#160;</span>The men marveled, saying, “What kind of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_28">28&#160;</span>When he came to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes,<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> two people possessed by demons met him there, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that nobody could pass that way. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_29">29&#160;</span>Behold, they cried out, saying, “What do we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_30">30&#160;</span>Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding far away from them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_31">31&#160;</span>The demons begged him, saying, “If you cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of pigs.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT8_32">32&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Go!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They came out and went into the herd of pigs; and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea and died in the water. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_33">33&#160;</span>Those who fed them fled and went away into the city and told everything, including what happened to those who were possessed with demons. 
<span class="verse" id="MT8_34">34&#160;</span>Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus. When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their borders.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_1">1&#160;</span>He entered into a boat and crossed over, and came into his own city. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, they brought to him a man who was paralyzed, lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, <span class='wj'>“Son, cheer up! Your sins are forgiven you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, “This man blasphemes.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, <span class='wj'>“Why do you think evil in your hearts? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For which is easier, to say, ‘Your sins are forgiven;’ or to say, ‘Get up, and walk?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins—”</span> (then he said to the paralytic), <span class='wj'>“Get up, and take up your mat, and go to your house.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_7">7&#160;</span>He arose and departed to his house. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_8">8&#160;</span>But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such authority to men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_9">9&#160;</span>As Jesus passed by from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office. He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Follow me.”</span> He got up and followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_10">10&#160;</span>As he sat in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and his disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_11">11&#160;</span>When the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_12">12&#160;</span>When Jesus heard it, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’</span><a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”</span><a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_14">14&#160;</span>Then John’s disciples came to him, saying, “Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don’t fast?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_15">15&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for the patch would tear away from the garment, and a worse hole is made. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Neither do people put new wine into old wine skins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and the skins ruined. No, they put new wine into fresh wine skins, and both are preserved.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_18">18&#160;</span>While he told these things to them, behold, a ruler came and worshiped him, saying, “My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_19">19&#160;</span>Jesus got up and followed him, as did his disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_20">20&#160;</span>Behold, a woman who had a discharge of blood for twelve years came behind him, and touched the fringe<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of his garment; 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_21">21&#160;</span>for she said within herself, “If I just touch his garment, I will be made well.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_22">22&#160;</span>But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, <span class='wj'>“Daughter, cheer up! Your faith has made you well.”</span> And the woman was made well from that hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_23">23&#160;</span>When Jesus came into the ruler’s house and saw the flute players and the crowd in noisy disorder, 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_24">24&#160;</span>he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Make room, because the girl isn’t dead, but sleeping.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They were ridiculing him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_25">25&#160;</span>But when the crowd was sent out, he entered in, took her by the hand, and the girl arose. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_26">26&#160;</span>The report of this went out into all that land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_27">27&#160;</span>As Jesus passed by from there, two blind men followed him, calling out and saying, “Have mercy on us, son of David!” 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_28">28&#160;</span>When he had come into the house, the blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Do you believe that I am able to do this?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They told him, “Yes, Lord.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_29">29&#160;</span>Then he touched their eyes, saying, <span class='wj'>“According to your faith be it done to you.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_30">30&#160;</span>Then their eyes were opened. Jesus strictly commanded them, saying, <span class='wj'>“See that no one knows about this.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_31">31&#160;</span>But they went out and spread abroad his fame in all that land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_32">32&#160;</span>As they went out, behold, a mute man who was demon possessed was brought to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_33">33&#160;</span>When the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. The multitudes marveled, saying, “Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_34">34&#160;</span>But the Pharisees said, “By the prince of the demons, he casts out demons.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT9_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_36">36&#160;</span>But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them because they were harassed<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> and scattered, like sheep without a shepherd. 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_37">37&#160;</span>Then he said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT9_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send out laborers into his harvest.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_1">1&#160;</span>He called to himself his twelve disciples, and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every sickness. 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_2">2&#160;</span>Now the names of the twelve apostles are these. The first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee; John, his brother; 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_3">3&#160;</span>Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus; Lebbaeus, who was also called<a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Thaddaeus; 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_4">4&#160;</span>Simon the Zealot; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus sent these twelve out and commanded them, saying, <span class='wj'>“Don’t go among the Gentiles, and don’t enter into any city of the Samaritans. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As you go, preach, saying, ‘The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,</span><a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>and cast out demons. Freely you received, so freely give. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t take any gold, silver, or brass in your money belts. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Take no bag for your journey, neither two coats, nor sandals, nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Into whatever city or village you enter, find out who in it is worthy, and stay there until you go on. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As you enter into the household, greet it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If the household is worthy, let your peace come on it, but if it isn’t worthy, let your peace return to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever doesn’t receive you or hear your words, as you go out of that house or that city, shake the dust off your feet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, I send you out as sheep among wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents and harmless as doves. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they will scourge you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Yes, and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the nations. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But when they deliver you up, don’t be anxious how or what you will say, for it will be given you in that hour what you will say. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will be hated by all men for my name’s sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the next, for most certainly I tell you, you will not have gone through the cities of Israel until the Son of Man has come.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It is enough for the disciple that he be like his teacher, and the servant like his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul,</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>how much more those of his household! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore don’t be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the housetops. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t be afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Rather, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.</span><a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Aren’t two sparrows sold for an assarion coin?</span><a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>Not one of them falls to the ground apart from your Father’s will. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore don’t be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Everyone therefore who confesses me before men, I will also confess him before my Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But whoever denies me before men, I will also deny him before my Father who is in heaven.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Don’t think that I came to send peace on the earth. I didn’t come to send peace, but a sword. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I came to set a man at odds against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A man’s foes will be those of his own household.</span><a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me isn’t worthy of me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who doesn’t take his cross and follow after me isn’t worthy of me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who seeks his life will lose it; and he who loses his life for my sake will find it. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT10_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward. He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man’s reward. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT10_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, most certainly I tell you, he will in no way lose his reward.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_1">1&#160;</span>When Jesus had finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_2">2&#160;</span>Now when John heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_3">3&#160;</span>and said to him, “Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Go and tell John the things which you hear and see: </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.</span><a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_7">7&#160;</span>As these went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, <span class='wj'>“What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But what did you go out to see? A man in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in kings’ houses. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For this is he, of whom it is written, ‘Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.’</span><a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, among those who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer; yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>From the days of John the Baptizer until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.</span><a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If you are willing to receive it, this is Elijah, who is to come. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has ears to hear, let him hear.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, who call to their companions </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and say, ‘We played the flute for you, and you didn’t dance. We mourned for you, and you didn’t lament.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, ‘He has a demon.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Behold, a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ But wisdom is justified by her children.”</span><a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_20">20&#160;</span>Then he began to denounce the cities in which most of his mighty works had been done, because they didn’t repent. 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, you will go down to Hades. </span><a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>For if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in you, it would have remained until today. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom on the day of judgment, than for you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_25">25&#160;</span>At that time, Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to infants. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows the Son, except the Father; neither does anyone know the Father, except the Son and he to whom the Son desires to reveal him.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT11_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Come to me, all you who labor and are heavily burdened, and I will give you rest. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart; and you will find rest for your souls. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT11_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_1">1&#160;</span>At that time, Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain fields. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_2">2&#160;</span>But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, “Behold, your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_3">3&#160;</span>But he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Haven’t you read what David did when he was hungry, and those who were with him: </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>how he entered into God’s house and ate the show bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, nor for those who were with him, but only for the priests?</span><a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or have you not read in the law that on the Sabbath day the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath and are guiltless? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you that one greater than the temple is here. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if you had known what this means, ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,’</span><a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>you wouldn’t have condemned the guiltless. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_9">9&#160;</span>He departed from there and went into their synagogue. 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_10">10&#160;</span>And behold, there was a man with a withered hand. They asked him, “Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?” so that they might accuse him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_11">11&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“What man is there among you who has one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day, won’t he grab on to it and lift it out? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Of how much more value then is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_13">13&#160;</span>Then he told the man, <span class='wj'>“Stretch out your hand.”</span> He stretched it out; and it was restored whole, just like the other. 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_14">14&#160;</span>But the Pharisees went out and conspired against him, how they might destroy him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_15">15&#160;</span>Jesus, perceiving that, withdrew from there. Great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all, 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_16">16&#160;</span>and commanded them that they should not make him known, 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_17">17&#160;</span>that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_18">18&#160;</span>“Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. </div>
<div class='q'>I will put my Spirit on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will proclaim justice to the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_19">19&#160;</span>He will not strive, nor shout, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_20">20&#160;</span>He won’t break a bruised reed. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t quench a smoking flax, </div>
<div class='q'>until he leads justice to victory. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_21">21&#160;</span>In his name, the nations will hope.”<a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_22">22&#160;</span>Then one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, was brought to him; and he healed him, so that the blind and mute man both spoke and saw. 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_23">23&#160;</span>All the multitudes were amazed, and said, “Can this be the son of David?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_24">24&#160;</span>But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, “This man does not cast out demons except by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_25">25&#160;</span>Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then God’s Kingdom has come upon you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or how can one enter into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong man? Then he will plunder his house.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“He who is not with me is against me, and he who doesn’t gather with me, scatters. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven men. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, either in this age, or in that which is to come.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Either make the tree good and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt and its fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The good man out of his good treasure</span><a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>brings out good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings out evil things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I tell you that every idle word that men speak, they will give account of it in the day of judgment. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_38">38&#160;</span>Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered, “Teacher, we want to see a sign from you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_39">39&#160;</span>But he answered them, <span class='wj'>“An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah the prophet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the huge fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with this generation and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, someone greater than Solomon is here. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When an unclean spirit has gone out of a man, he passes through waterless places seeking rest, and doesn’t find it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then he says, ‘I will return into my house from which I came;’ and when he has come back, he finds it empty, swept, and put in order. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then he goes and takes with himself seven other spirits more evil than he is, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first. Even so will it be also to this evil generation.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_46">46&#160;</span>While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, seeking to speak to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_47">47&#160;</span>One said to him, “Behold, your mother and your brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT12_48">48&#160;</span>But he answered him who spoke to him, <span class='wj'>“Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_49">49&#160;</span>He stretched out his hand toward his disciples, and said, <span class='wj'>“Behold, my mother and my brothers! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT12_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_1">1&#160;</span>On that day Jesus went out of the house and sat by the seaside. 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_2">2&#160;</span>Great multitudes gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat and sat; and all the multitude stood on the beach. 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_3">3&#160;</span>He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, <span class='wj'>“Behold, a farmer went out to sow. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As he sowed, some seeds fell by the roadside, and the birds came and devoured them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell on rocky ground, where they didn’t have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, because they had no depth of earth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When the sun had risen, they were scorched. Because they had no root, they withered away. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell among thorns. The thorns grew up and choked them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell on good soil and yielded fruit: some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_10">10&#160;</span>The disciples came, and said to him, “Why do you speak to them in parables?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_11">11&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have abundance; but whoever doesn’t have, from him will be taken away even that which he has. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they don’t see, and hearing, they don’t hear, neither do they understand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, which says, </span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>‘By hearing you will hear,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>and will in no way understand;</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>Seeing you will see,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>and will in no way perceive;</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for this people’s heart has grown callous,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>their ears are dull of hearing,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>and they have closed their eyes;</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>or else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>hear with their ears,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>understand with their heart,</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>and would turn again,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>and I would heal them.’</span><a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For most certainly I tell you that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see, and didn’t see them; and to hear the things which you hear, and didn’t hear them.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Hear, then, the parable of the farmer. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When anyone hears the word of the Kingdom and doesn’t understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away that which has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown by the roadside. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What was sown on the rocky places, this is he who hears the word and immediately with joy receives it; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately he stumbles. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What was sown among the thorns, this is he who hears the word, but the cares of this age and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What was sown on the good ground, this is he who hears the word and understands it, who most certainly bears fruit and produces, some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_24">24&#160;</span>He set another parable before them, saying, <span class='wj'>“The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but while people slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel weeds</span><a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>also among the wheat, and went away. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But when the blade sprang up and produced grain, then the darnel weeds appeared also. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The servants of the householder came and said to him, ‘Sir, didn’t you sow good seed in your field? Where did these darnel weeds come from?’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“He said to them, ‘An enemy has done this.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“The servants asked him, ‘Do you want us to go and gather them up?’ </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But he said, ‘No, lest perhaps while you gather up the darnel weeds, you root up the wheat with them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers, “First, gather up the darnel weeds, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn.” ’ ”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_31">31&#160;</span>He set another parable before them, saying, <span class='wj'>“The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed which a man took, and sowed in his field, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>which indeed is smaller than all seeds. But when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_33">33&#160;</span>He spoke another parable to them. <span class='wj'>“The Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast which a woman took and hid in three measures</span><a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>of meal, until it was all leavened.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes; and without a parable, he didn’t speak to them, 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_35">35&#160;</span>that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“I will open my mouth in parables; </div>
<div class='q2'>I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world.”<a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_36">36&#160;</span>Then Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, “Explain to us the parable of the darnel weeds of the field.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_37">37&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the field is the world, the good seeds are the children of the Kingdom, and the darnel weeds are the children of the evil one. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As therefore the darnel weeds are gathered up and burned with fire; so will it be at the end of this age. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling and those who do iniquity, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like treasure hidden in the field, which a man found and hid. In his joy, he goes and sells all that he has and buys that field.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>who having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had and bought it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet that was cast into the sea and gathered some fish of every kind, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>which, when it was filled, fishermen drew up on the beach. They sat down and gathered the good into containers, but the bad they threw away. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So it will be in the end of the world.</span><a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>The angels will come and separate the wicked from among the righteous, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_51">51&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Have you understood all these things?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>They answered him, “Yes, Lord.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_52">52&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Therefore every scribe who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a householder, who brings out of his treasure new and old things.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT13_53">53&#160;</span>When Jesus had finished these parables, he departed from there. 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_54">54&#160;</span>Coming into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished and said, “Where did this man get this wisdom and these mighty works? 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_55">55&#160;</span>Isn’t this the carpenter’s son? Isn’t his mother called Mary, and his brothers James, Joses, Simon, and Judas?<a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_56">56&#160;</span>Aren’t all of his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all of these things?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_57">57&#160;</span>They were offended by him. </div>
<div class='p'>But Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country and in his own house.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT13_58">58&#160;</span>He didn’t do many mighty works there because of their unbelief.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_1">1&#160;</span>At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus, 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_2">2&#160;</span>and said to his servants, “This is John the Baptizer. He is risen from the dead. That is why these powers work in him.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_3">3&#160;</span>For Herod had arrested John, bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_4">4&#160;</span>For John said to him, “It is not lawful for you to have her.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_5">5&#160;</span>When he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_6">6&#160;</span>But when Herod’s birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced among them and pleased Herod. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_8">8&#160;</span>She, being prompted by her mother, said, “Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_9">9&#160;</span>The king was grieved, but for the sake of his oaths and of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded it to be given, 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_10">10&#160;</span>and he sent and beheaded John in the prison. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_11">11&#160;</span>His head was brought on a platter and given to the young lady; and she brought it to her mother. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_12">12&#160;</span>His disciples came, took the body, and buried it. Then they went and told Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_13">13&#160;</span>Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat to a deserted place apart. When the multitudes heard it, they followed him on foot from the cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_14">14&#160;</span>Jesus went out, and he saw a great multitude. He had compassion on them and healed their sick. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_15">15&#160;</span>When evening had come, his disciples came to him, saying, “This place is deserted, and the hour is already late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves food.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_16">16&#160;</span>But Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“They don’t need to go away. You give them something to eat.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_17">17&#160;</span>They told him, “We only have here five loaves and two fish.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_18">18&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“Bring them here to me.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_19">19&#160;</span>He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples; and the disciples gave to the multitudes. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_20">20&#160;</span>They all ate and were filled. They took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the broken pieces. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_21">21&#160;</span>Those who ate were about five thousand men, in addition to women and children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_22">22&#160;</span>Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat and go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent the multitudes away. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_23">23&#160;</span>After he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. When evening had come, he was there alone. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_24">24&#160;</span>But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_25">25&#160;</span>In the fourth watch of the night,<a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Jesus came to them, walking on the sea.<a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_26">26&#160;</span>When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, “It’s a ghost!” and they cried out for fear. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_27">27&#160;</span>But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying, <span class='wj'>“Cheer up! It is I! </span><a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>Don’t be afraid.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_28">28&#160;</span>Peter answered him and said, “Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the waters.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_29">29&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“Come!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Peter stepped down from the boat and walked on the waters to come to Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_30">30&#160;</span>But when he saw that the wind was strong, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, “Lord, save me!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_31">31&#160;</span>Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand, took hold of him, and said to him, <span class='wj'>“You of little faith, why did you doubt?”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_32">32&#160;</span>When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_33">33&#160;</span>Those who were in the boat came and worshiped him, saying, “You are truly the Son of God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT14_34">34&#160;</span>When they had crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret. 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_35">35&#160;</span>When the people of that place recognized him, they sent into all that surrounding region and brought to him all who were sick; 
<span class="verse" id="MT14_36">36&#160;</span>and they begged him that they might just touch the fringe<a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of his garment. As many as touched it were made whole.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_1">1&#160;</span>Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_2">2&#160;</span>“Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don’t wash their hands when they eat bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_3">3&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For God commanded, ‘Honor your father and your mother,’</span><a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>and, ‘He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.’</span><a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you say, ‘Whoever may tell his father or his mother, “Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is a gift devoted to God,” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>he shall not honor his father or mother.’ You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying,</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘These people draw near to me with their mouth,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>and honor me with their lips;</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>but their heart is far from me.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>And they worship me in vain,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>teaching as doctrine rules made by men.’ ”</span><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_10">10&#160;</span>He summoned the multitude, and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Hear, and understand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>That which enters into the mouth doesn’t defile the man; but that which proceeds out of the mouth, this defiles the man.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_12">12&#160;</span>Then the disciples came and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this saying?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_13">13&#160;</span>But he answered, <span class='wj'>“Every plant which my heavenly Father didn’t plant will be uprooted. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Leave them alone. They are blind guides of the blind. If the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_15">15&#160;</span>Peter answered him, “Explain the parable to us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_16">16&#160;</span>So Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Do you also still not understand? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t you understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the belly and then out of the body? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the things which proceed out of the mouth come out of the heart, and they defile the man. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false testimony, and blasphemies. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>These are the things which defile the man; but to eat with unwashed hands doesn’t defile the man.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus went out from there and withdrew into the region of Tyre and Sidon. 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_22">22&#160;</span>Behold, a Canaanite woman came out from those borders and cried, saying, “Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of David! My daughter is severely possessed by a demon!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_23">23&#160;</span>But he answered her not a word. </div>
<div class='p'>His disciples came and begged him, saying, “Send her away; for she cries after us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_24">24&#160;</span>But he answered, <span class='wj'>“I wasn’t sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_25">25&#160;</span>But she came and worshiped him, saying, “Lord, help me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_26">26&#160;</span>But he answered, <span class='wj'>“It is not appropriate to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_27">27&#160;</span>But she said, “Yes, Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters’ table.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_28">28&#160;</span>Then Jesus answered her, <span class='wj'>“Woman, great is your faith! Be it done to you even as you desire.”</span> And her daughter was healed from that hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus departed from there and came near to the sea of Galilee; and he went up on the mountain and sat there. 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_30">30&#160;</span>Great multitudes came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, maimed, and many others, and they put them down at his feet. He healed them, 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_31">31&#160;</span>so that the multitude wondered when they saw the mute speaking, the injured healed, the lame walking, and the blind seeing—and they glorified the God of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_32">32&#160;</span>Jesus summoned his disciples and said, <span class='wj'>“I have compassion on the multitude, because they have continued with me now three days and have nothing to eat. I don’t want to send them away fasting, or they might faint on the way.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_33">33&#160;</span>The disciples said to him, “Where could we get so many loaves in a deserted place as to satisfy so great a multitude?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“How many loaves do you have?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Seven, and a few small fish.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT15_35">35&#160;</span>He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground; 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_36">36&#160;</span>and he took the seven loaves and the fish. He gave thanks and broke them, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes. 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_37">37&#160;</span>They all ate and were filled. They took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over. 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_38">38&#160;</span>Those who ate were four thousand men, in addition to women and children. 
<span class="verse" id="MT15_39">39&#160;</span>Then he sent away the multitudes, got into the boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_1">1&#160;</span>The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and testing him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_2">2&#160;</span>But he answered them, <span class='wj'>“When it is evening, you say, ‘It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In the morning, ‘It will be foul weather today, for the sky is red and threatening.’ Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you can’t discern the signs of the times! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there will be no sign given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He left them and departed. 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_5">5&#160;</span>The disciples came to the other side and had forgotten to take bread. 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_6">6&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_7">7&#160;</span>They reasoned among themselves, saying, “We brought no bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_8">8&#160;</span>Jesus, perceiving it, said, <span class='wj'>“Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, because you have brought no bread? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t you yet perceive or remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>or the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>How is it that you don’t perceive that I didn’t speak to you concerning bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_12">12&#160;</span>Then they understood that he didn’t tell them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_13">13&#160;</span>Now when Jesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, <span class='wj'>“Who do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_14">14&#160;</span>They said, “Some say John the Baptizer, some, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah or one of the prophets.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_15">15&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“But who do you say that I am?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_16">16&#160;</span>Simon Peter answered, “You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus answered him, <span class='wj'>“Blessed are you, Simon Bar Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I also tell you that you are Peter,</span><a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>and on this rock </span><a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>I will build my assembly, and the gates of Hades</span><a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>will not prevail against it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I will give to you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven; and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_20">20&#160;</span>Then he commanded the disciples that they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_21">21&#160;</span>From that time, Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_22">22&#160;</span>Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying, “Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done to you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_23">23&#160;</span>But he turned and said to Peter, <span class='wj'>“Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, for you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of men.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT16_24">24&#160;</span>Then Jesus said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole world and forfeits his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to everyone according to his deeds. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT16_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste of death until they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom.” </span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_1">1&#160;</span>After six days, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up into a high mountain by themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_2">2&#160;</span>He was changed<a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> before them. His face shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as the light. 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them talking with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_4">4&#160;</span>Peter answered and said to Jesus, “Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, let’s make three tents here: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_5">5&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. Behold, a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_6">6&#160;</span>When the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were very afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus came and touched them and said, <span class='wj'>“Get up, and don’t be afraid.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_8">8&#160;</span>Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_9">9&#160;</span>As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, <span class='wj'>“Don’t tell anyone what you saw, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_10">10&#160;</span>His disciples asked him, saying, “Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_11">11&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Elijah indeed comes first, and will restore all things; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but I tell you that Elijah has come already, and they didn’t recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted to. Even so the Son of Man will also suffer by them.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_13">13&#160;</span>Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptizer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_14">14&#160;</span>When they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling down to him and saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_15">15&#160;</span>“Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic and suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire, and often into the water. 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_16">16&#160;</span>So I brought him to your disciples, and they could not cure him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“Faithless and perverse generation! How long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him here to me.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_18">18&#160;</span>Jesus rebuked the demon, and it went out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_19">19&#160;</span>Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, “Why weren’t we able to cast it out?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_20">20&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Because of your unbelief. For most certainly I tell you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move; and nothing will be impossible for you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But this kind doesn’t go out except by prayer and fasting.” </span><a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_22">22&#160;</span>While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>They were exceedingly sorry. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_24">24&#160;</span>When they had come to Capernaum, those who collected the didrachma coins<a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> came to Peter, and said, “Doesn’t your teacher pay the didrachma?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_25">25&#160;</span>He said, “Yes.” </div>
<div class='p'>When he came into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, <span class='wj'>“What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their children, or from strangers?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT17_26">26&#160;</span>Peter said to him, “From strangers.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Therefore the children are exempt. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT17_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But, lest we cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. When you have opened its mouth, you will find a stater coin.</span><a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>Take that, and give it to them for me and you.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_1">1&#160;</span>In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, “Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_2">2&#160;</span>Jesus called a little child to himself, and set him in the middle of them 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_3">3&#160;</span>and said, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, unless you turn and become as little children, you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever therefore humbles himself as this little child is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if a huge millstone were hung around his neck and that he were sunk in the depths of the sea. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling! For it must be that the occasions come, but woe to that person through whom the occasion comes! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna</span><a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>of fire. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>See that you don’t despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost.</span><a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“What do you think? If a man has one hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, doesn’t he leave the ninety-nine, go to the mountains, and seek that which has gone astray? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If he finds it, most certainly I tell you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“If your brother sins against you, go, show him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained back your brother. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if he doesn’t listen, take one or two more with you, that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.</span><a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the assembly. If he refuses to hear the assembly also, let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, whatever things you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever things you release on earth will have been released in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again, assuredly I tell you, that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the middle of them.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_21">21&#160;</span>Then Peter came and said to him, “Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_22">22&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“I don’t tell you until seven times, but, until seventy times seven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king who wanted to settle accounts with his servants. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When he had begun to settle, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.</span><a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But because he couldn’t pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, with his wife, his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The servant therefore fell down and knelt before him, saying, ‘Lord, have patience with me, and I will repay you all!’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him and forgave him the debt.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But that servant went out and found one of his fellow servants who owed him one hundred denarii,</span><a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>and he grabbed him and took him by the throat, saying, ‘Pay me what you owe!’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT18_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him, saying, ‘Have patience with me, and I will repay you!’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He would not, but went and cast him into prison until he should pay back that which was due. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were exceedingly sorry, and came and told their lord all that was done. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then his lord called him in and said to him, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt because you begged me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Shouldn’t you also have had mercy on your fellow servant, even as I had mercy on you?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>His lord was angry, and delivered him to the tormentors until he should pay all that was due to him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT18_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So my heavenly Father will also do to you, if you don’t each forgive your brother from your hearts for his misdeeds.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_1">1&#160;</span>When Jesus had finished these words, he departed from Galilee and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_2">2&#160;</span>Great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_3">3&#160;</span>Pharisees came to him, testing him and saying, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_4">4&#160;</span>He answered, <span class='wj'>“Haven’t you read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female,</span><a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and said, ‘For this cause a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh?’</span><a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So that they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, don’t let man tear apart.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_7">7&#160;</span>They asked him, “Why then did Moses command us to give her a certificate of divorce and divorce her?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_8">8&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it has not been so. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery; and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_10">10&#160;</span>His disciples said to him, “If this is the case of the man with his wife, it is not expedient to marry.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_11">11&#160;</span>But he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Not all men can receive this saying, but those to whom it is given. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother’s womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven’s sake. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_13">13&#160;</span>Then little children were brought to him that he should lay his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_14">14&#160;</span>But Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Allow the little children, and don’t forbid them to come to me; for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to ones like these.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_15">15&#160;</span>He laid his hands on them, and departed from there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_16">16&#160;</span>Behold, one came to him and said, “Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_17">17&#160;</span>He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Why do you call me good?</span><a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>No one is good but one, that is, God. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_18">18&#160;</span>He said to him, “Which ones?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“ ‘You shall not murder.’ ‘You shall not commit adultery.’ ‘You shall not steal.’ ‘You shall not offer false testimony.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘Honor your father and your mother.’</span><a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>And, ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’ ”</span><a href='#FN97' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_20">20&#160;</span>The young man said to him, “All these things I have observed from my youth. What do I still lack?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_22">22&#160;</span>But when the young man heard this, he went away sad, for he was one who had great possessions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I say to you, a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with difficulty. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into God’s Kingdom.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_25">25&#160;</span>When the disciples heard it, they were exceedingly astonished, saying, “Who then can be saved?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_26">26&#160;</span>Looking at them, Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_27">27&#160;</span>Then Peter answered, “Behold, we have left everything and followed you. What then will we have?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT19_28">28&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that you who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name’s sake, will receive one hundred times, and will inherit eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT19_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But many will be last who are first, and first who are last. </span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius</span><a href='#FN98' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>a day, he sent them into his vineyard. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He went out about the third hour,</span><a href='#FN99' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>and saw others standing idle in the marketplace. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He said to them, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.’ So they went their way. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour,</span><a href='#FN100' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>and did likewise. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>About the eleventh hour</span><a href='#FN101' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>he went out and found others standing idle. He said to them, ‘Why do you stand here all day idle?’ </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“They said to him, ‘Because no one has hired us.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“He said to them, ‘You also go into the vineyard, and you will receive whatever is right.’ </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When evening had come, the lord of the vineyard said to his manager, ‘Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last to the first.’</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise each received a denarius. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When they received it, they murmured against the master of the household, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>saying, ‘These last have spent one hour, and you have made them equal to us who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat!’ </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But he answered one of them, ‘Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Didn’t you agree with me for a denarius? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Take that which is yours, and go your way. It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Isn’t it lawful for me to do what I want to with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So the last will be first, and the first last. For many are called, but few are chosen.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_17">17&#160;</span>As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them, 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock, to scourge, and to crucify; and the third day he will be raised up.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_20">20&#160;</span>Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_21">21&#160;</span>He said to her, <span class='wj'>“What do you want?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>She said to him, “Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your right hand and one on your left hand, in your Kingdom.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_22">22&#160;</span>But Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“You don’t know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “We are able.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_23">23&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“You will indeed drink my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give, but it is for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_24">24&#160;</span>When the ten heard it, they were indignant with the two brothers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_25">25&#160;</span>But Jesus summoned them, and said, <span class='wj'>“You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It shall not be so among you; but whoever desires to become great among you shall be</span><a href='#FN102' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>your servant. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever desires to be first among you shall be your bondservant, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_29">29&#160;</span>As they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_30">30&#160;</span>Behold, two blind men sitting by the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, “Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!” 
<span class="verse" id="MT20_31">31&#160;</span>The multitude rebuked them, telling them that they should be quiet, but they cried out even more, “Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_32">32&#160;</span>Jesus stood still and called them, and asked, <span class='wj'>“What do you want me to do for you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_33">33&#160;</span>They told him, “Lord, that our eyes may be opened.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT20_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus, being moved with compassion, touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received their sight, and they followed him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_1">1&#160;</span>When they came near to Jerusalem and came to Bethsphage,<a href='#FN103' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples, 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_2">2&#160;</span>saying to them, <span class='wj'>“Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them and bring them to me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, ‘The Lord needs them,’ and immediately he will send them.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_4">4&#160;</span>All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_5">5&#160;</span>“Tell the daughter of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>behold, your King comes to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>humble, and riding on a donkey, </div>
<div class='q2'>on a colt, the foal of a donkey.”<a href='#FN104' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_6">6&#160;</span>The disciples went and did just as Jesus commanded them, 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_7">7&#160;</span>and brought the donkey and the colt and laid their clothes on them; and he sat on them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_8">8&#160;</span>A very great multitude spread their clothes on the road. Others cut branches from the trees and spread them on the road. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_9">9&#160;</span>The multitudes who went in front of him, and those who followed, kept shouting, “Hosanna<a href='#FN105' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” <a href='#FN106' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_10">10&#160;</span>When he had come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred up, saying, “Who is this?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_11">11&#160;</span>The multitudes said, “This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_12">12&#160;</span>Jesus entered into the temple of God and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the money changers’ tables and the seats of those who sold the doves. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_13">13&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“It is written, ‘My house shall be called a house of prayer,’</span><a href='#FN107' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>but you have made it a den of robbers!”</span><a href='#FN108' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_14">14&#160;</span>The lame and the blind came to him in the temple, and he healed them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_15">15&#160;</span>But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children who were crying in the temple and saying, “Hosanna to the son of David!” they were indignant, 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_16">16&#160;</span>and said to him, “Do you hear what these are saying?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Yes. Did you never read, ‘Out of the mouth of children and nursing babies, you have perfected praise?’ ”</span><a href='#FN109' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_17">17&#160;</span>He left them and went out of the city to Bethany, and camped there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_18">18&#160;</span>Now in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_19">19&#160;</span>Seeing a fig tree by the road, he came to it and found nothing on it but leaves. He said to it, <span class='wj'>“Let there be no fruit from you forever!” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>Immediately the fig tree withered away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_20">20&#160;</span>When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, “How did the fig tree immediately wither away?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, if you have faith and don’t doubt, you will not only do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you told this mountain, ‘Be taken up and cast into the sea,’ it would be done. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All things, whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you will receive.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_23">23&#160;</span>When he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, “By what authority do you do these things? Who gave you this authority?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_24">24&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“I also will ask you one question, which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The baptism of John, where was it from? From heaven or from men?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>They reasoned with themselves, saying, “If we say, ‘From heaven,’ he will ask us, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_26">26&#160;</span>But if we say, ‘From men,’ we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_27">27&#160;</span>They answered Jesus, and said, “We don’t know.” </div>
<div class='p'>He also said to them, <span class='wj'>“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But what do you think? A man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said, ‘Son, go work today in my vineyard.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He answered, ‘I will not,’ but afterward he changed his mind, and went. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He came to the second, and said the same thing. He answered, ‘I’m going, sir,’ but he didn’t go. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Which of the two did the will of his father?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “The first.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering into God’s Kingdom before you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you didn’t believe him; but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. When you saw it, you didn’t even repent afterward, that you might believe him. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Hear another parable. There was a man who was a master of a household who planted a vineyard, set a hedge about it, dug a wine press in it, built a tower, leased it out to farmers, and went into another country. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When the season for the fruit came near, he sent his servants to the farmers to receive his fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The farmers took his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned another. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again, he sent other servants more than the first; and they treated them the same way. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But afterward he sent to them his son, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him and seize his inheritance.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard, then killed him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_41">41&#160;</span>They told him, “He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers who will give him the fruit in its season.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_42">42&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Did you never read in the Scriptures, </span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>‘The stone which the builders rejected</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>was made the head of the corner.</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>This was from the Lord.</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>It is marvelous in our eyes’?</span><a href='#FN110' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Therefore I tell you, God’s Kingdom will be taken away from you and will be given to a nation producing its fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but on whomever it will fall, it will scatter him as dust.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT21_45">45&#160;</span>When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke about them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT21_46">46&#160;</span>When they sought to seize him, they feared the multitudes, because they considered him to be a prophet.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_1">1&#160;</span>Jesus answered and spoke to them again in parables, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who made a wedding feast for his son, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and sent out his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding feast, but they would not come. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again he sent out other servants, saying, ‘Tell those who are invited, “Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My cattle and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. Come to the wedding feast!” ’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and the rest grabbed his servants, treated them shamefully, and killed them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When the king heard that, he was angry, and sent his armies, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then he said to his servants, ‘The wedding is ready, but those who were invited weren’t worthy. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Go therefore to the intersections of the highways, and as many as you may find, invite to the wedding feast.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Those servants went out into the highways and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and good. The wedding was filled with guests. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who didn’t have on wedding clothing, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and he said to him, ‘Friend, how did you come in here not wearing wedding clothing?’ He was speechless. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then the king said to the servants, ‘Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and throw him into the outer darkness. That is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For many are called, but few chosen.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_15">15&#160;</span>Then the Pharisees went and took counsel how they might entrap him in his talk. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_16">16&#160;</span>They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, “Teacher, we know that you are honest, and teach the way of God in truth, no matter whom you teach; for you aren’t partial to anyone. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_17">17&#160;</span>Tell us therefore, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_18">18&#160;</span>But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, <span class='wj'>“Why do you test me, you hypocrites? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Show me the tax money.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They brought to him a denarius. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_20">20&#160;</span>He asked them, <span class='wj'>“Whose is this image and inscription?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_21">21&#160;</span>They said to him, “Caesar’s.” </div>
<div class='p'>Then he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_22">22&#160;</span>When they heard it, they marveled, and left him and went away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_23">23&#160;</span>On that day Sadducees (those who say that there is no resurrection) came to him. They asked him, 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_24">24&#160;</span>saying, “Teacher, Moses said, ‘If a man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife and raise up offspring<a href='#FN111' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> for his brother.’ 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_25">25&#160;</span>Now there were with us seven brothers. The first married and died, and having no offspring left his wife to his brother. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_26">26&#160;</span>In the same way, the second also, and the third, to the seventh. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_27">27&#160;</span>After them all, the woman died. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_28">28&#160;</span>In the resurrection therefore, whose wife will she be of the seven? For they all had her.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_29">29&#160;</span>But Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“You are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For in the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like God’s angels in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But concerning the resurrection of the dead, haven’t you read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?’</span><a href='#FN112' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_33">33&#160;</span>When the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_34">34&#160;</span>But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, gathered themselves together. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_35">35&#160;</span>One of them, a lawyer, asked him a question, testing him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_36">36&#160;</span>“Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_37">37&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“ ‘You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.’</span><a href='#FN113' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This is the first and great commandment. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>A second likewise is this, ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’</span><a href='#FN114' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_41">41&#160;</span>Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question, 
<span class="verse" id="MT22_42">42&#160;</span>saying, <span class='wj'>“What do you think of the Christ? Whose son is he?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “Of David.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_43">43&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“How then does David in the Spirit call him Lord, saying,</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘The Lord said to my Lord,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>sit on my right hand,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet’?</span><a href='#FN115' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT22_46">46&#160;</span>No one was able to answer him a word, neither did any man dare ask him any more questions from that day forward.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_1">1&#160;</span>Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples, 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_2">2&#160;</span>saying, <span class='wj'>“The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ seat. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All things therefore whatever they tell you to observe, observe and do, but don’t do their works; for they say, and don’t do. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For they bind heavy burdens that are grievous to be borne, and lay them on men’s shoulders; but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But they do all their works to be seen by men. They make their phylacteries</span><a href='#FN116' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>broad and enlarge the fringes</span><a href='#FN117' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>of their garments, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and love the place of honor at feasts, the best seats in the synagogues, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the salutations in the marketplaces, and to be called ‘Rabbi, Rabbi</span><a href='#FN118' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>by men. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you are not to be called ‘Rabbi’, for one is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Call no man on the earth your father, for one is your Father, he who is in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Neither be called masters, for one is your master, the Christ. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But he who is greatest among you will be your servant. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows’ houses, and as a pretense you make long prayers. Therefore you will receive greater condemnation.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you don’t enter in yourselves, neither do you allow those who are entering in to enter.</span><a href='#FN119' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much a son of Gehenna</span><a href='#FN120' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>as yourselves. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, you blind guides, who say, ‘Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is obligated.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You blind fools! For which is greater, the gold or the temple that sanctifies the gold? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>And, ‘Whoever swears by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, he is obligated?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You blind fools! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it and by everything on it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who swears by the temple, swears by it and by him who has been living</span><a href='#FN121' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>in it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God and by him who sits on it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin,</span><a href='#FN122' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>and have left undone the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. But you ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You blind guides, who strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel! </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness.</span><a href='#FN123' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You blind Pharisee, first clean the inside of the cup and of the platter, that its outside may become clean also.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitened tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men’s bones and of all uncleanness. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even so you also outwardly appear righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets and decorate the tombs of the righteous, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and say, ‘If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we wouldn’t have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore you testify to yourselves that you are children of those who killed the prophets. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You serpents, you offspring of vipers, how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna?</span><a href='#FN124' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets, wise men, and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues and persecute from city to city, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, all these things will come upon this generation.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT23_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often I would have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you would not! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Behold, your house is left to you desolate. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT23_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For I tell you, you will not see me from now on, until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’ ”</span><a href='#FN125' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_1">1&#160;</span> Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way. His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_2">2&#160;</span> But he answered them, <span class='wj'>“You see all of these things, don’t you? Most certainly I tell you, there will not be left here one stone on another, that will not be thrown down.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_3">3&#160;</span>As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, “Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Be careful that no one leads you astray. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am the Christ,’ and will lead many astray. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you aren’t troubled, for all this must happen, but the end is not yet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But all these things are the beginning of birth pains. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then they will deliver you up to oppression and will kill you. You will be hated by all of the nations for my name’s sake. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then many will stumble, and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Many false prophets will arise and will lead many astray. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Because iniquity will be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But he who endures to the end will be saved. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This Good News of the Kingdom will be preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation,</span><a href='#FN126' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand), </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Let him who is on the housetop not go down to take out the things that are in his house. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Let him who is in the field not return back to get his clothes. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Pray that your flight will not be in the winter nor on a Sabbath, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for then there will be great suffering,</span><a href='#FN127' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever will be. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved. But for the sake of the chosen ones, those days will be shortened. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then if any man tells you, ‘Behold, here is the Christ!’ or, ‘There!’ don’t believe it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For false christs and false prophets will arise, and they will show great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, I have told you beforehand. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“If therefore they tell you, ‘Behold, he is in the wilderness,’ don’t go out; or ‘Behold, he is in the inner rooms,’ don’t believe it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For as the lightning flashes from the east, and is seen even to the west, so will the coming of the Son of Man be. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For wherever the carcass is, that is where the vultures</span><a href='#FN128' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>gather together. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But immediately after the suffering</span><a href='#FN129' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken;</span><a href='#FN130' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky. Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power and great glory. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He will send out his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Now from the fig tree learn this parable: When its branch has now become tender and produces its leaves, you know that the summer is near. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Even so you also, when you see all these things, know that he is near, even at the doors. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, this generation</span><a href='#FN131' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>will not pass away until all these things are accomplished. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But no one knows of that day and hour, not even the angels of heaven,</span><a href='#FN132' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>but my Father only.</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As the days of Noah were, so will the coming of the Son of Man be. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and they didn’t know until the flood came and took them all away, so will the coming of the Son of Man be. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then two men will be in the field: one will be taken and one will be left. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Two women will be grinding at the mill: one will be taken and one will be left. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch therefore, for you don’t know in what hour your Lord comes. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore also be ready, for in an hour that you don’t expect, the Son of Man will come.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT24_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has set over his household, to give them their food in due season? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds doing so when he comes. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if that evil servant should say in his heart, ‘My lord is delaying his coming,’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and begins to beat his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunkards, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the lord of that servant will come in a day when he doesn’t expect it and in an hour when he doesn’t know it, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT24_51">51&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and will cut him in pieces and appoint his portion with the hypocrites. That is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be. </span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Five of them were foolish, and five were wise. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Those who were foolish, when they took their lamps, took no oil with them, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But at midnight there was a cry, ‘Behold! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.</span><a href='#FN133' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The foolish said to the wise, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the wise answered, saying, ‘What if there isn’t enough for us and you? You go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>While they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was shut. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Afterward the other virgins also came, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But he answered, ‘Most certainly I tell you, I don’t know you.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch therefore, for you don’t know the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“For it is like a man going into another country, who called his own servants and entrusted his goods to them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>To one he gave five talents,</span><a href='#FN134' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>to another two, to another one, to each according to his own ability. Then he went on his journey. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Immediately he who received the five talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>In the same way, he also who got the two gained another two. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But he who received the one talent went away and dug in the earth and hid his lord’s money.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Now after a long time the lord of those servants came, and settled accounts with them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who received the five talents came and brought another five talents, saying, ‘Lord, you delivered to me five talents. Behold, I have gained another five talents in addition to them.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“His lord said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“He also who got the two talents came and said, ‘Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I have gained another two talents in addition to them.’ </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“His lord said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things. I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“He also who had received the one talent came and said, ‘Lord, I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you didn’t sow, and gathering where you didn’t scatter. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I was afraid, and went away and hid your talent in the earth. Behold, you have what is yours.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But his lord answered him, ‘You wicked and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I didn’t sow, and gather where I didn’t scatter. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You ought therefore to have deposited my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received back my own with interest. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Take away therefore the talent from him and give it to him who has the ten talents. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who doesn’t have, even that which he has will be taken away. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Before him all the nations will be gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then the King will tell those on his right hand, ‘Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for I was hungry and you gave me food to eat. I was thirsty and you gave me drink. I was a stranger and you took me in. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I was naked and you clothed me. I was sick and you visited me. I was in prison and you came to me.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then the righteous will answer him, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you a drink? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When did we see you as a stranger and take you in, or naked and clothe you? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When did we see you sick or in prison and come to you?’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“The King will answer them, ‘Most certainly I tell you, because you did it to one of the least of these my brothers,</span><a href='#FN135' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'> you did it to me.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then he will say also to those on the left hand, ‘Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for I was hungry, and you didn’t give me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I was a stranger, and you didn’t take me in; naked, and you didn’t clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you didn’t visit me.’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then they will also answer, saying, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and didn’t help you?’</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT25_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Then he will answer them, saying, ‘Most certainly I tell you, because you didn’t do it to one of the least of these, you didn’t do it to me.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT25_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_1">1&#160;</span> When Jesus had finished all these words, he said to his disciples, 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_3">3&#160;</span>Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_4">4&#160;</span>They took counsel together that they might take Jesus by deceit and kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_5">5&#160;</span>But they said, “Not during the feast, lest a riot occur among the people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_6">6&#160;</span>Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_7">7&#160;</span>a woman came to him having an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_8">8&#160;</span>But when his disciples saw this, they were indignant, saying, “Why this waste? 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_9">9&#160;</span>For this ointment might have been sold for much and given to the poor.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_10">10&#160;</span>However, knowing this, Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you trouble the woman? She has done a good work for me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For you always have the poor with you, but you don’t always have me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For in pouring this ointment on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, wherever this Good News is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial of her.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_14">14&#160;</span>Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_15">15&#160;</span>and said, “What are you willing to give me if I deliver him to you?” So they weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_16">16&#160;</span>From that time he sought opportunity to betray him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_17">17&#160;</span>Now on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, “Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_18">18&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“Go into the city to a certain person, and tell him, ‘The Teacher says, “My time is at hand. I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.” ’ ”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_19">19&#160;</span>The disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_20">20&#160;</span>Now when evening had come, he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_21">21&#160;</span>As they were eating, he said, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_22">22&#160;</span>They were exceedingly sorrowful, and each began to ask him, “It isn’t me, is it, Lord?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_23">23&#160;</span>He answered, <span class='wj'>“He who dipped his hand with me in the dish will betray me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Son of Man goes even as it is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_25">25&#160;</span>Judas, who betrayed him, answered, “It isn’t me, is it, Rabbi?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, <span class='wj'>“You said it.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_26">26&#160;</span>As they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks for<a href='#FN136' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> it, and broke it. He gave to the disciples and said, <span class='wj'>“Take, eat; this is my body.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_27">27&#160;</span>He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, <span class='wj'>“All of you drink it, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you that I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on, until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father’s Kingdom.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_30">30&#160;</span>When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_31">31&#160;</span>Then Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.’</span><a href='#FN137' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_33">33&#160;</span>But Peter answered him, “Even if all will be made to stumble because of you, I will never be made to stumble.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that tonight, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_35">35&#160;</span>Peter said to him, “Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you.” All of the disciples also said likewise. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_36">36&#160;</span>Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“Sit here, while I go there and pray.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_37">37&#160;</span>He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_38">38&#160;</span>Then he said to them, <span class='wj'>“My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here and watch with me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_39">39&#160;</span>He went forward a little, fell on his face, and prayed, saying, <span class='wj'>“My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I desire, but what you desire.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_40">40&#160;</span>He came to the disciples and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, <span class='wj'>“What, couldn’t you watch with me for one hour? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch and pray, that you don’t enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_42">42&#160;</span>Again, a second time he went away and prayed, saying, <span class='wj'>“My Father, if this cup can’t pass away from me unless I drink it, your desire be done.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_43">43&#160;</span>He came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_44">44&#160;</span>He left them again, went away, and prayed a third time, saying the same words. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_45">45&#160;</span>Then he came to his disciples and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Are you still sleeping and resting? Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Arise, let’s be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_47">47&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests and elders of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_48">48&#160;</span>Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, “Whoever I kiss, he is the one. Seize him.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_49">49&#160;</span>Immediately he came to Jesus, and said, “Greetings, Rabbi!” and kissed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_50">50&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Friend, why are you here?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_51">51&#160;</span>Behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_52">52&#160;</span>Then Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Put your sword back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the sword. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_53">53&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Or do you think that I couldn’t ask my Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_54">54&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_55">55&#160;</span>In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, <span class='wj'>“Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily in the temple teaching, and you didn’t arrest me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_56">56&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But all this has happened that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Then all the disciples left him and fled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_57">57&#160;</span>Those who had taken Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_58">58&#160;</span>But Peter followed him from a distance to the court of the high priest, and entered in and sat with the officers, to see the end. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_59">59&#160;</span>Now the chief priests, the elders, and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to death, 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_60">60&#160;</span>and they found none. Even though many false witnesses came forward, they found none. But at last two false witnesses came forward 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_61">61&#160;</span>and said, “This man said, ‘I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_62">62&#160;</span>The high priest stood up and said to him, “Have you no answer? What is this that these testify against you?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_63">63&#160;</span>But Jesus stayed silent. The high priest answered him, “I adjure you by the living God that you tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_64">64&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“You have said so. Nevertheless, I tell you, after this you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of the sky.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_65">65&#160;</span>Then the high priest tore his clothing, saying, “He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_66">66&#160;</span>What do you think?” </div>
<div class='p'>They answered, “He is worthy of death!” 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_67">67&#160;</span>Then they spat in his face and beat him with their fists, and some slapped him, 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_68">68&#160;</span>saying, “Prophesy to us, you Christ! Who hit you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_69">69&#160;</span>Now Peter was sitting outside in the court, and a maid came to him, saying, “You were also with Jesus, the Galilean!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_70">70&#160;</span>But he denied it before them all, saying, “I don’t know what you are talking about.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_71">71&#160;</span>When he had gone out onto the porch, someone else saw him and said to those who were there, “This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_72">72&#160;</span>Again he denied it with an oath, “I don’t know the man.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_73">73&#160;</span>After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter, “Surely you are also one of them, for your speech makes you known.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT26_74">74&#160;</span>Then he began to curse and to swear, “I don’t know the man!” </div>
<div class='p'>Immediately the rooster crowed. 
<span class="verse" id="MT26_75">75&#160;</span>Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him, <span class='wj'>“Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times.”</span> Then he went out and wept bitterly.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_1">1&#160;</span>Now when morning had come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_2">2&#160;</span>They bound him, led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_3">3&#160;</span>Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, felt remorse, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_4">4&#160;</span>saying, “I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood.” </div>
<div class='p'>But they said, “What is that to us? You see to it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_5">5&#160;</span>He threw down the pieces of silver in the sanctuary and departed. Then he went away and hanged himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_6">6&#160;</span>The chief priests took the pieces of silver and said, “It’s not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_7">7&#160;</span>They took counsel, and bought the potter’s field with them to bury strangers in. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore that field has been called “The Field of Blood” to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_9">9&#160;</span>Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah<a href='#FN138' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the prophet was fulfilled, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“They took the thirty pieces of silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>the price of him upon whom a price had been set, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom some of the children of Israel priced, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_10">10&#160;</span>and they gave them for the potter’s field, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the Lord commanded me.”<a href='#FN139' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_11">11&#160;</span>Now Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him, saying, “Are you the King of the Jews?” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“So you say.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_12">12&#160;</span>When he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_13">13&#160;</span>Then Pilate said to him, “Don’t you hear how many things they testify against you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_14">14&#160;</span>He gave him no answer, not even one word, so that the governor marveled greatly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_15">15&#160;</span>Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the multitude one prisoner whom they desired. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_16">16&#160;</span>They had then a notable prisoner called Barabbas. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_17">17&#160;</span>When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, “Whom do you want me to release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_18">18&#160;</span>For he knew that because of envy they had delivered him up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_19">19&#160;</span>While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, “Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I have suffered many things today in a dream because of him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_20">20&#160;</span>Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas and destroy Jesus. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_21">21&#160;</span>But the governor answered them, “Which of the two do you want me to release to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Barabbas!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_22">22&#160;</span>Pilate said to them, “What then shall I do to Jesus who is called Christ?” </div>
<div class='p'>They all said to him, “Let him be crucified!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_23">23&#160;</span>But the governor said, “Why? What evil has he done?” </div>
<div class='p'>But they cried out exceedingly, saying, “Let him be crucified!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_24">24&#160;</span>So when Pilate saw that nothing was being gained, but rather that a disturbance was starting, he took water and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, “I am innocent of the blood of this righteous person. You see to it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_25">25&#160;</span>All the people answered, “May his blood be on us and on our children!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_26">26&#160;</span>Then he released Barabbas to them, but Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_27">27&#160;</span>Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium, and gathered the whole garrison together against him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_28">28&#160;</span>They stripped him and put a scarlet robe on him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_29">29&#160;</span>They braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they kneeled down before him and mocked him, saying, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_30">30&#160;</span>They spat on him, and took the reed and struck him on the head. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_31">31&#160;</span>When they had mocked him, they took the robe off him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away to crucify him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_32">32&#160;</span>As they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelled him to go with them, that he might carry his cross. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_33">33&#160;</span>When they came to a place called “Golgotha”, that is to say, “The place of a skull,” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_34">34&#160;</span>they gave him sour wine<a href='#FN140' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to drink mixed with gall.<a href='#FN141' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> When he had tasted it, he would not drink. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_35">35&#160;</span>When they had crucified him, they divided his clothing among them, casting lots,<a href='#FN142' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_36">36&#160;</span>and they sat and watched him there. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_37">37&#160;</span>They set up over his head the accusation against him written, “THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_38">38&#160;</span>Then there were two robbers crucified with him, one on his right hand and one on the left. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_39">39&#160;</span>Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_40">40&#160;</span>and saying, “You who destroy the temple and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_41">41&#160;</span>Likewise the chief priests also mocking with the scribes, the Pharisees,<a href='#FN143' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and the elders, said, 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_42">42&#160;</span>“He saved others, but he can’t save himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_43">43&#160;</span>He trusts in God. Let God deliver him now, if he wants him; for he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_44">44&#160;</span>The robbers also who were crucified with him cast on him the same reproach. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_45">45&#160;</span>Now from the sixth hour<a href='#FN144' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour.<a href='#FN145' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_46">46&#160;</span>About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, <span class='wj'>“Eli, Eli, lima</span><a href='#FN146' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>sabachthani?” </span> That is, <span class='wj'>“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”</span><a href='#FN147' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_47">47&#160;</span>Some of them who stood there, when they heard it, said, “This man is calling Elijah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_48">48&#160;</span>Immediately one of them ran and took a sponge, filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave him a drink. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_49">49&#160;</span>The rest said, “Let him be. Let’s see whether Elijah comes to save him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_50">50&#160;</span>Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up his spirit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_51">51&#160;</span>Behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were split. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_52">52&#160;</span>The tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised; 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_53">53&#160;</span>and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_54">54&#160;</span>Now the centurion and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake and the things that were done, were terrified, saying, “Truly this was the Son of God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_55">55&#160;</span>Many women were there watching from afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_56">56&#160;</span>Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_57">57&#160;</span>When evening had come, a rich man from Arimathaea named Joseph, who himself was also Jesus’ disciple, came. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_58">58&#160;</span>This man went to Pilate and asked for Jesus’ body. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_59">59&#160;</span>Joseph took the body and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_60">60&#160;</span>and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had cut out in the rock. Then he rolled a large stone against the door of the tomb, and departed. 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_61">61&#160;</span>Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_62">62&#160;</span>Now on the next day, which was the day after the Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together to Pilate, 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_63">63&#160;</span>saying, “Sir, we remember what that deceiver said while he was still alive: ‘After three days I will rise again.’ 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_64">64&#160;</span>Command therefore that the tomb be made secure until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples come at night and steal him away, and tell the people, ‘He is risen from the dead;’ and the last deception will be worse than the first.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT27_65">65&#160;</span>Pilate said to them, “You have a guard. Go, make it as secure as you can.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT27_66">66&#160;</span>So they went with the guard and made the tomb secure, sealing the stone.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MT28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_1">1&#160;</span>Now after the Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from the sky and came and rolled away the stone from the door and sat on it. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_3">3&#160;</span>His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_4">4&#160;</span>For fear of him, the guards shook, and became like dead men. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_5">5&#160;</span>The angel answered the women, “Don’t be afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus, who has been crucified. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_6">6&#160;</span>He is not here, for he has risen, just like he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was lying. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_7">7&#160;</span>Go quickly and tell his disciples, ‘He has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee; there you will see him.’ Behold, I have told you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_8">8&#160;</span>They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to bring his disciples word. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_9">9&#160;</span>As they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, <span class='wj'>“Rejoice!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They came and took hold of his feet, and worshiped him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_10">10&#160;</span>Then Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Don’t be afraid. Go tell my brothers </span><a href='#FN148' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>that they should go into Galilee, and there they will see me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_11">11&#160;</span>Now while they were going, behold, some of the guards came into the city and told the chief priests all the things that had happened. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_12">12&#160;</span>When they were assembled with the elders and had taken counsel, they gave a large amount of silver to the soldiers, 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_13">13&#160;</span>saying, “Say that his disciples came by night and stole him away while we slept. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_14">14&#160;</span>If this comes to the governor’s ears, we will persuade him and make you free of worry.” 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_15">15&#160;</span>So they took the money and did as they were told. This saying was spread abroad among the Jews, and continues until today. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MT28_16">16&#160;</span>But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had sent them. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_17">17&#160;</span>When they saw him, they bowed down to him; but some doubted. 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_18">18&#160;</span>Jesus came to them and spoke to them, saying, <span class='wj'>“All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Go</span><a href='#FN149' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MT28_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>teaching them to observe all things that I commanded you. Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age.”</span> Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Messiah (Hebrew) and Christ (Greek) both mean “Anointed One”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:16</a>
 <span class="ft">“Jesus” means “Salvation”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_20"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:20</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “ἰδοὺ”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_21"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:21</a>
 <span class="ft">“Jesus” means “Salvation”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT1_23"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:23</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_14'>Isaiah 7:14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “wise men” (magoi) can also mean teachers, scientists, physicians, astrologers, seers, interpreters of dreams, or sorcerers.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_6"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:6</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='MIC.xhtml#MC5_2'>Micah 5:2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_15"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:15</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='HOS.xhtml#HS11_1'>Hosea 11:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT2_18"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:18</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JER.xhtml#JR31_15'>Jeremiah 31:15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_3"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 3:3</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>Isaiah 40:3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU add “and with fire” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT3_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:13</a>
 <span class="ft">i.e., the Jordan River</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_3'>Deuteronomy 8:3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_6"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:6</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS91_11'>Psalm 91:11-12</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_7"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:7</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_16'>Deuteronomy 6:16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:10</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU read “Go away” instead of “Get behind me”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_10"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:10</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_13'>Deuteronomy 6:13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_16"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:16</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_1'>Isaiah 9:1-2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT4_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:18</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “Jesus” instead of “he” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_3"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:3</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_15'>Isaiah 57:15</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_2'>66:2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_2'>Isaiah 61:2</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_10'>66:10,13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:5</a>
 <span class="ft">or, land.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS37_11'>Psalm 37:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:18</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, iota</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:18</a>
 <span class="ft">or, serif</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_21"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:21</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_13'>Exodus 20:13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_22"><span class="notemark">§</span> 5:22</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “without a cause”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_22"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:22</a>
 <span class="ft">“Raca” is an Aramaic insult, related to the word for “empty” and conveying the idea of empty-headedness.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_22"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:22</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_26"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:26</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, kodrantes. A kodrantes was a small copper coin worth about 2 lepta (widow’s mites)—not enough to buy very much of anything.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_27"><span class="notemark">§</span> 5:27</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “to the ancients”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_27"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:27</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_14'>Exodus 20:14</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:29</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:30</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_31"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:31</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT24_1'>Deuteronomy 24:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_33"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:33</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='NUM.xhtml#NU30_2'>Numbers 30:2</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT23_21'>Deuteronomy 23:21</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ECC.xhtml#EC5_4'>Ecclesiastes 5:4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_38"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:38</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_24'>Exodus 21:24</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_20'>Leviticus 24:20</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_21'>Deuteronomy 19:21</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_43"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 5:43</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>Leviticus 19:18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_43"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:43</a>
 <span class="ft">not in the Bible, but see Qumran Manual of Discipline Ix, 21-26</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT5_47"><span class="notemark">§</span> 5:47</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “Gentiles” instead of “tax collectors”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:1</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “acts of righteousness” instead of “charitable giving”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6:13</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT6_27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6:27</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, cubit</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:14</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “Because” instead of “How”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:15</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “them” instead of “him”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 8:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_4'>Isaiah 53:4</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT8_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8:28</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “Gadarenes”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_13"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 9:13</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>Hosea 6:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:13</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “to repentance”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:20</a>
 <span class="ft">or, tassel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT9_36"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:36</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “weary” instead of “harassed” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:3</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “Lebbaeus, who was also called”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “raise the dead,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10:25</a>
 <span class="ft">Literally, Lord of the Flies, or the devil</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_28"><span class="notemark">§</span> 10:28</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:29</a>
 <span class="ft">An assarion is a small coin worth one tenth of a drachma or a sixteenth of a denarius. An assarion is approximately the wages of one half hour of agricultural labor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT10_36"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:36</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='MIC.xhtml#MC7_6'>Micah 7:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_5'>Isaiah 35:5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_1'>Isaiah 61:1-4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_10"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:10</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_1'>Malachi 3:1</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:12</a>
 <span class="ft">or, plunder it. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11:19</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “actions” instead of “children”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT11_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 11:23</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='1SA.xhtml#S121_3'>1 Samuel 21:3-6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_7"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:7</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='HOS.xhtml#HS6_6'>Hosea 6:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_21"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:21</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_1'>Isaiah 42:1-4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT12_35"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:35</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “of the heart”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_15"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:15</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_9'>Isaiah 6:9-10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:25</a>
 <span class="ft">darnel is a weed grass (probably bearded darnel or lolium temulentum) that looks very much like wheat until it is mature, when the difference becomes very apparent.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_33"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:33</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, three sata. Three sata is about 39 liters or a bit more than a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_35"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:35</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS78_2'>Psalm 78:2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_49"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13:49</a>
 <span class="ft"> or, end of the age.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT13_55"><span class="notemark">§</span> 13:55</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Judah</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:25</a>
 <span class="ft">The night was equally divided into four watches, so the fourth watch is approximately 3:00 a.m. to sunrise. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_25"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 14:25</a>
 <span class="xt">See <a class='bibleref' href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_8'>Job 9:8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:27</a>
 <span class="ft">or, I AM!</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT14_36"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 14:36</a>
 <span class="ft">or, tassel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exodus 20:12</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>Deuteronomy 5:16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_17'>Exodus 21:17</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_9'>Leviticus 20:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT15_9"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:9</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_13'>Isaiah 29:13</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Peter’s name, Petros in Greek, is the word for a specific rock or stone.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Greek, petra, a rock mass or bedrock.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT16_18"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16:18</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, transfigured</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:21</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 21.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:24</a>
 <span class="ft">A didrachma is a Greek silver coin worth 2 drachmas, about as much as 2 Roman denarii, or about 2 days’ wages. It was commonly used to pay the half-shekel temple tax, because 2 drachmas were worth one half shekel of silver. A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT17_27"><span class="notemark">§</span> 17:27</a>
 <span class="ft">A stater is a silver coin equivalent to four Attic or two Alexandrian drachmas, or a Jewish shekel: just exactly enough to cover the half-shekel temple tax for two people. A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, usually in the form of a silver coin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18:9</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18:11</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 11.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_16"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 18:16</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT19_15'>Deuteronomy 19:15</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18:24</a>
 <span class="ft">Ten thousand talents (about 300 metric tons of silver) represents an extremely large sum of money, equivalent to about 60,000,000 denarii, where one denarius was typical of one day’s wages for agricultural labor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT18_28"><span class="notemark">§</span> 18:28</a>
 <span class="ft">100 denarii was about one sixtieth of a talent, or about 500 grams (1.1 pounds) of silver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_4"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:4</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>Genesis 1:27</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_24'>Genesis 2:24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:17</a>
 <span class="ft">So MT and TR. NU reads “Why do you ask me about what is good?”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_19"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:19</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exodus 20:12-16</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>Deuteronomy 5:16-20</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN97"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT19_19"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:19</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>Leviticus 19:18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN98"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:2</a>
 <span class="ft">A denarius is a silver Roman coin worth 1/25th of a Roman aureus. This was a common wage for a day of farm labor.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN99"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_3"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:3</a>
 <span class="ft">Time was measured from sunrise to sunset, so the third hour would be about 9:00 a.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN100"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20:5</a>
 <span class="ft">noon and 3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN101"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_6"><span class="notemark">§</span> 20:6</a>
 <span class="ft">5:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN102"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT20_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:26</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “let him be” instead of “shall be” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN103"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:1</a>
 <span class="ft">TR &amp; NU read “Bethphage” instead of “Bethsphage”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN104"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_5"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:5</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC9_9'>Zechariah 9:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN105"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21:9</a>
 <span class="ft">“Hosanna” means “save us” or “help us, we pray”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN106"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_9"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:9</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_26'>Psalm 118:26</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN107"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_13"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:13</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_7'>Isaiah 56:7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN108"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_13"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:13</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JER.xhtml#JR7_11'>Jeremiah 7:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN109"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_16"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:16</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS8_2'>Psalm 8:2</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN110"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT21_42"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 21:42</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>Psalm 118:22-23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN111"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_24"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22:24</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN112"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_32"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 22:32</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_6'>Exodus 3:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN113"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_37"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 22:37</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_5'>Deuteronomy 6:5</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN114"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_39"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 22:39</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>Leviticus 19:18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN115"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT22_44"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 22:44</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_1'>Psalm 110:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN116"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:5</a>
 <span class="ft">phylacteries (tefillin in Hebrew) are small leather pouches that some Jewish men wear on their forehead and arm in prayer. They are used to carry a small scroll with some Scripture in it. See <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_8'>Deuteronomy 6:8</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN117"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:5</a>
 <span class="ft">or, tassels</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN118"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23:7</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits the second “Rabbi”. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN119"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_14"><span class="notemark">§</span> 23:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Some Greek texts reverse the order of verses 13 and 14, and some omit verse 13, numbering verse 14 as 13. NU omits verse 14.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN120"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:15</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN121"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:21</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “lives”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN122"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23:23</a>
 <span class="ft">cumin is an aromatic seed from Cuminum cyminum, resembling caraway in flavor and appearance. It is used as a spice.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN123"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_25"><span class="notemark">§</span> 23:25</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “self-indulgence” instead of “unrighteousness”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN124"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:33</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN125"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT23_39"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 23:39</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_26'>Psalm 118:26</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN126"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_15"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 24:15</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_27'>Daniel 9:27</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_31'>11:31</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_11'>12:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN127"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:21</a>
 <span class="ft">or, oppression</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN128"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24:28</a>
 <span class="ft">or, eagles</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN129"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_29"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 24:29</a>
 <span class="ft">or, oppression</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN130"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_29"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 24:29</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_10'>Isaiah 13:10</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_4'>34:4</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN131"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_34"><span class="notemark">§</span> 24:34</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “generation” (genea) can also be translated as “race.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN132"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT24_36"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:36</a>
 <span class="ft">NU adds “nor the son”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN133"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:7</a>
 <span class="ft">The end of the wick of an oil lamp needs to be cut off periodically to avoid having it become clogged with carbon deposits. The wick height is also adjusted so that the flame burns evenly and gives good light without producing a lot of smoke.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN134"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25:15</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds (usually used to weigh silver unless otherwise specified)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN135"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT25_40"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 25:40</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN136"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26:26</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “blessed” instead of “gave thanks for”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN137"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT26_31"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 26:31</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC13_7'>Zechariah 13:7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN138"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:9</a>
 <span class="ft">some manuscripts omit “Jeremiah”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN139"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_10"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 27:10</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC11_12'>Zechariah 11:12-13</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='JER.xhtml#JR19_1'>Jeremiah 19:1-13</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='JER.xhtml#JR32_6'>32:6-9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN140"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_34"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:34</a>
 <span class="ft">or, vinegar</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN141"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_34"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27:34</a>
 <span class="ft">Gall is a bitter-tasting, dark green oil from a wormwood plant that is alcoholic in its effect.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN142"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_35"><span class="notemark">§</span> 27:35</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet: ‘They divided my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast lots;’ ” [see <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_18'>Psalm 22:18</a> and <a class='bibleref' href='JHN.xhtml#JN19_24'>John 19:24</a>]</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN143"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_41"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:41</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “the Pharisees”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN144"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_45"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:45</a>
 <span class="ft">noon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN145"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_45"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27:45</a>
 <span class="ft">3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN146"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_46"><span class="notemark">§</span> 27:46</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “lama” instead of “lima”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN147"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT27_46"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 27:46</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_1'>Psalm 22:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN148"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT28_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28:10</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here may be also correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN149"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MT28_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28:19</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU add “therefore”</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
