<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Mark 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Mark</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_0'>16</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='MK0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Good News According to </div>
<div class='mt'>Mark  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="MK1_1">1&#160;</span>The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ, the Son of God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_2">2&#160;</span>As it is written in the prophets, </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I send my messenger before your face, </div>
<div class='q2'>who will prepare your way before you:<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_3">3&#160;</span>the voice of one crying in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Make ready the way of the Lord! </div>
<div class='q2'>Make his paths straight!’ ”<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_4">4&#160;</span>John came baptizing<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> in the wilderness and preaching the baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_5">5&#160;</span>All the country of Judea and all those of Jerusalem went out to him. They were baptized by him in the Jordan river, confessing their sins. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_6">6&#160;</span>John was clothed with camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist. He ate locusts and wild honey. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_7">7&#160;</span>He preached, saying, “After me comes he who is mightier than I, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loosen. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_8">8&#160;</span>I baptized you in<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> water, but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_9">9&#160;</span>In those days, Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_10">10&#160;</span>Immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens parting and the Spirit descending on him like a dove. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_11">11&#160;</span>A voice came out of the sky, “You are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_12">12&#160;</span>Immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_13">13&#160;</span>He was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals; and the angels were serving him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_14">14&#160;</span>Now after John was taken into custody, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Good News of God’s Kingdom, 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_15">15&#160;</span>and saying, <span class='wj'>“The time is fulfilled, and God’s Kingdom is at hand! Repent, and believe in the Good News.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_16">16&#160;</span>Passing along by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew, the brother of Simon, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Come after me, and I will make you into fishers for men.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_18">18&#160;</span>Immediately they left their nets, and followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_19">19&#160;</span>Going on a little further from there, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were also in the boat mending the nets. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_20">20&#160;</span>Immediately he called them, and they left their father, Zebedee, in the boat with the hired servants, and went after him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_21">21&#160;</span>They went into Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_22">22&#160;</span>They were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_23">23&#160;</span>Immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out, 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_24">24&#160;</span>saying, “Ha! What do we have to do with you, Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_25">25&#160;</span>Jesus rebuked him, saying, <span class='wj'>“Be quiet, and come out of him!” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_26">26&#160;</span>The unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_27">27&#160;</span>They were all amazed, so that they questioned among themselves, saying, “What is this? A new teaching? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him!” 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_28">28&#160;</span>The report of him went out immediately everywhere into all the region of Galilee and its surrounding area. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_29">29&#160;</span>Immediately, when they had come out of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_30">30&#160;</span>Now Simon’s wife’s mother lay sick with a fever, and immediately they told him about her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_31">31&#160;</span>He came and took her by the hand and raised her up. The fever left her immediately,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> and she served them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_32">32&#160;</span>At evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were sick and those who were possessed by demons. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_33">33&#160;</span>All the city was gathered together at the door. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_34">34&#160;</span>He healed many who were sick with various diseases and cast out many demons. He didn’t allow the demons to speak, because they knew him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_35">35&#160;</span>Early in the morning, while it was still dark, he rose up and went out, and departed into a deserted place, and prayed there. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_36">36&#160;</span>Simon and those who were with him searched for him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_37">37&#160;</span>They found him and told him, “Everyone is looking for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_38">38&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Let’s go elsewhere into the next towns, that I may preach there also, because I came out for this reason.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_39">39&#160;</span>He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_40">40&#160;</span>A leper came to him, begging him, kneeling down to him, and saying to him, “If you want to, you can make me clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_41">41&#160;</span>Being moved with compassion, he stretched out his hand, and touched him, and said to him, <span class='wj'>“I want to. Be made clean.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_42">42&#160;</span>When he had said this, immediately the leprosy departed from him and he was made clean. 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_43">43&#160;</span>He strictly warned him and immediately sent him out, 
<span class="verse" id="MK1_44">44&#160;</span>and said to him, <span class='wj'>“See that you say nothing to anybody, but go show yourself to the priest and offer for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK1_45">45&#160;</span>But he went out, and began to proclaim it much, and to spread about the matter, so that Jesus could no more openly enter into a city, but was outside in desert places. People came to him from everywhere.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_1">1&#160;</span>When he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was heard that he was at home. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_2">2&#160;</span>Immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no more room, not even around the door; and he spoke the word to them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_3">3&#160;</span>Four people came, carrying a paralytic to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_4">4&#160;</span>When they could not come near to him for the crowd, they removed the roof where he was. When they had broken it up, they let down the mat that the paralytic was lying on. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, <span class='wj'>“Son, your sins are forgiven you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_6">6&#160;</span>But there were some of the scribes sitting there and reasoning in their hearts, 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_7">7&#160;</span>“Why does this man speak blasphemies like that? Who can forgive sins but God alone?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_8">8&#160;</span>Immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you reason these things in your hearts? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Which is easier, to tell the paralytic, ‘Your sins are forgiven;’ or to say, ‘Arise, and take up your bed, and walk?’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”</span>—he said to the paralytic— 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I tell you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your house.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_12">12&#160;</span>He arose, and immediately took up the mat and went out in front of them all, so that they were all amazed and glorified God, saying, “We never saw anything like this!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_13">13&#160;</span>He went out again by the seaside. All the multitude came to him, and he taught them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_14">14&#160;</span>As he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office. He said to him, <span class='wj'>“Follow me.”</span> And he arose and followed him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_15">15&#160;</span>He was reclining at the table in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_16">16&#160;</span>The scribes and the Pharisees, when they saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, “Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_17">17&#160;</span>When Jesus heard it, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_18">18&#160;</span>John’s disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came and asked him, “Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don’t fast?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_19">19&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Can the groomsmen fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they can’t fast. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast in that day. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, or else the patch shrinks and the new tears away from the old, and a worse hole is made. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>No one puts new wine into old wineskins; or else the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine pours out, and the skins will be destroyed; but they put new wine into fresh wineskins.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_23">23&#160;</span>He was going on the Sabbath day through the grain fields; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of grain. 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_24">24&#160;</span>The Pharisees said to him, “Behold, why do they do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_25">25&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Did you never read what David did when he had need and was hungry—he, and those who were with him? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>How he entered into God’s house at the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the show bread, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests, and gave also to those who were with him?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK2_27">27&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK2_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_1">1&#160;</span>He entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man there whose hand was withered. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_2">2&#160;</span>They watched him, whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_3">3&#160;</span>He said to the man whose hand was withered, <span class='wj'>“Stand up.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_4">4&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Is it lawful on the Sabbath day to do good or to do harm? To save a life or to kill?”</span> But they were silent. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_5">5&#160;</span>When he had looked around at them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their hearts, he said to the man, <span class='wj'>“Stretch out your hand.” </span> He stretched it out, and his hand was restored as healthy as the other. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_6">6&#160;</span>The Pharisees went out, and immediately conspired with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_7">7&#160;</span>Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples; and a great multitude followed him from Galilee, from Judea, 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_8">8&#160;</span>from Jerusalem, from Idumaea, beyond the Jordan, and those from around Tyre and Sidon. A great multitude, hearing what great things he did, came to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_9">9&#160;</span>He spoke to his disciples that a little boat should stay near him because of the crowd, so that they wouldn’t press on him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_10">10&#160;</span>For he had healed many, so that as many as had diseases pressed on him that they might touch him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_11">11&#160;</span>The unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him and cried, “You are the Son of God!” 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_12">12&#160;</span>He sternly warned them that they should not make him known. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_13">13&#160;</span>He went up into the mountain and called to himself those whom he wanted, and they went to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_14">14&#160;</span>He appointed twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send them out to preach 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_15">15&#160;</span>and to have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons: 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_16">16&#160;</span>Simon (to whom he gave the name Peter); 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_17">17&#160;</span>James the son of Zebedee; and John, the brother of James, (whom he called Boanerges, which means, Sons of Thunder); 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_18">18&#160;</span>Andrew; Philip; Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot; 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_19">19&#160;</span>and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. </div>
<div class='p'>Then he came into a house. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_20">20&#160;</span>The multitude came together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_21">21&#160;</span>When his friends heard it, they went out to seize him; for they said, “He is insane.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_22">22&#160;</span>The scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, “He has Beelzebul,” and, “By the prince of the demons he casts out the demons.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_23">23&#160;</span>He summoned them and said to them in parables, <span class='wj'>“How can Satan cast out Satan? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If Satan has risen up against himself, and is divided, he can’t stand, but has an end. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But no one can enter into the house of the strong man to plunder unless he first binds the strong man; then he will plunder his house. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, all sins of the descendants of man will be forgiven, including their blasphemies with which they may blaspheme; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is subject to eternal condemnation.”</span><a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_30">30&#160;</span>—because they said, “He has an unclean spirit.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_31">31&#160;</span>His mother and his brothers came, and standing outside, they sent to him, calling him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_32">32&#160;</span>A multitude was sitting around him, and they told him, “Behold, your mother, your brothers, and your sisters<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> are outside looking for you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK3_33">33&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“Who are my mother and my brothers?”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_34">34&#160;</span>Looking around at those who sat around him, he said, <span class='wj'>“Behold, my mother and my brothers! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK3_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever does the will of God is my brother, my sister, and mother.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_1">1&#160;</span>Again he began to teach by the seaside. A great multitude was gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat in the sea and sat down. All the multitude were on the land by the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_2">2&#160;</span>He taught them many things in parables, and told them in his teaching, 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Listen! Behold, the farmer went out to sow. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As he sowed, some seed fell by the road, and the birds</span><a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>came and devoured it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell on the rocky ground, where it had little soil, and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When the sun had risen, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others fell into the good ground and yielded fruit, growing up and increasing. Some produced thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times as much.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_9">9&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_10">10&#160;</span>When he was alone, those who were around him with the twelve asked him about the parables. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_11">11&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“To you is given the mystery of God’s Kingdom, but to those who are outside, all things are done in parables, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>that ‘seeing they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest perhaps they should turn again, and their sins should be forgiven them.’ ”</span><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_13">13&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Don’t you understand this parable? How will you understand all of the parables? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The farmer sows the word. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The ones by the road are the ones where the word is sown; and when they have heard, immediately Satan comes and takes away the word which has been sown in them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>These in the same way are those who are sown on the rocky places, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They have no root in themselves, but are short-lived. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately they stumble. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Others are those who are sown among the thorns. These are those who have heard the word, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Those which were sown on the good ground are those who hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit, some thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_21">21&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket </span><a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>or under a bed? Isn’t it put on a stand? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For there is nothing hidden except that it should be made known, neither was anything made secret but that it should come to light. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If any man has ears to hear, let him hear.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_24">24&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Take heed what you hear. With whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you; and more will be given to you who hear. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever has, to him more will be given; and he who doesn’t have, even that which he has will be taken away from him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_26">26&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“God’s Kingdom is as if a man should cast seed on the earth, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, though he doesn’t know how. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the earth bears fruit by itself: first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But when the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_30">30&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“How will we liken God’s Kingdom? Or with what parable will we illustrate it? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It’s like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, though it is less than all the seeds that are on the earth, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>yet when it is sown, grows up and becomes greater than all the herbs, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under its shadow.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_33">33&#160;</span>With many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_34">34&#160;</span>Without a parable he didn’t speak to them; but privately to his own disciples he explained everything. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_35">35&#160;</span>On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Let’s go over to the other side.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_36">36&#160;</span>Leaving the multitude, they took him with them, even as he was, in the boat. Other small boats were also with him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_37">37&#160;</span>A big wind storm arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so much that the boat was already filled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_38">38&#160;</span>He himself was in the stern, asleep on the cushion; and they woke him up and asked him, “Teacher, don’t you care that we are dying?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_39">39&#160;</span>He awoke and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, <span class='wj'>“Peace! Be still!”</span> The wind ceased and there was a great calm. 
<span class="verse" id="MK4_40">40&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK4_41">41&#160;</span>They were greatly afraid and said to one another, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_1">1&#160;</span>They came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_2">2&#160;</span>When he had come out of the boat, immediately a man with an unclean spirit met him out of the tombs. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_3">3&#160;</span>He lived in the tombs. Nobody could bind him any more, not even with chains, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_4">4&#160;</span>because he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been torn apart by him, and the fetters broken in pieces. Nobody had the strength to tame him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_5">5&#160;</span>Always, night and day, in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_6">6&#160;</span>When he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and bowed down to him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_7">7&#160;</span>and crying out with a loud voice, he said, “What have I to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, don’t torment me.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_8">8&#160;</span>For he said to him, <span class='wj'>“Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_9">9&#160;</span>He asked him, <span class='wj'>“What is your name?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He said to him, “My name is Legion, for we are many.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_10">10&#160;</span>He begged him much that he would not send them away out of the country. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_11">11&#160;</span>Now on the mountainside there was a great herd of pigs feeding. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_12">12&#160;</span>All the demons begged him, saying, “Send us into the pigs, that we may enter into them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_13">13&#160;</span>At once Jesus gave them permission. The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs. The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_14">14&#160;</span>Those who fed the pigs fled, and told it in the city and in the country. </div>
<div class='p'>The people came to see what it was that had happened. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_15">15&#160;</span>They came to Jesus, and saw him who had been possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind, even him who had the legion; and they were afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_16">16&#160;</span>Those who saw it declared to them what happened to him who was possessed by demons, and about the pigs. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_17">17&#160;</span>They began to beg him to depart from their region. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_18">18&#160;</span>As he was entering into the boat, he who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_19">19&#160;</span>He didn’t allow him, but said to him, <span class='wj'>“Go to your house, to your friends, and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you and how he had mercy on you.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_20">20&#160;</span>He went his way, and began to proclaim in Decapolis how Jesus had done great things for him, and everyone marveled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_21">21&#160;</span>When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side, a great multitude was gathered to him; and he was by the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_22">22&#160;</span>Behold, one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, came; and seeing him, he fell at his feet 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_23">23&#160;</span>and begged him much, saying, “My little daughter is at the point of death. Please come and lay your hands on her, that she may be made healthy, and live.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_24">24&#160;</span>He went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and they pressed upon him on all sides. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_25">25&#160;</span>A certain woman who had a discharge of blood for twelve years, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_26">26&#160;</span>and had suffered many things by many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was no better, but rather grew worse, 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_27">27&#160;</span>having heard the things concerning Jesus, came up behind him in the crowd and touched his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_28">28&#160;</span>For she said, “If I just touch his clothes, I will be made well.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_29">29&#160;</span>Immediately the flow of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_30">30&#160;</span>Immediately Jesus, perceiving in himself that the power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd and asked, <span class='wj'>“Who touched my clothes?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_31">31&#160;</span>His disciples said to him, “You see the multitude pressing against you, and you say, ‘Who touched me?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_32">32&#160;</span>He looked around to see her who had done this thing. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_33">33&#160;</span>But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_34">34&#160;</span>He said to her, <span class='wj'>“Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be cured of your disease.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_35">35&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue ruler’s house, saying, “Your daughter is dead. Why bother the Teacher any more?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_36">36&#160;</span>But Jesus, when he heard the message spoken, immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, <span class='wj'>“Don’t be afraid, only believe.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_37">37&#160;</span>He allowed no one to follow him except Peter, James, and John the brother of James. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_38">38&#160;</span>He came to the synagogue ruler’s house, and he saw an uproar, weeping, and great wailing. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_39">39&#160;</span>When he had entered in, he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you make an uproar and weep? The child is not dead, but is asleep.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK5_40">40&#160;</span>They ridiculed him. But he, having put them all out, took the father of the child, her mother, and those who were with him, and went in where the child was lying. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_41">41&#160;</span>Taking the child by the hand, he said to her, <span class='wj'>“Talitha cumi!” </span> which means, being interpreted, <span class='wj'>“Girl, I tell you, get up!” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_42">42&#160;</span>Immediately the girl rose up and walked, for she was twelve years old. They were amazed with great amazement. 
<span class="verse" id="MK5_43">43&#160;</span>He strictly ordered them that no one should know this, and commanded that something should be given to her to eat.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_1">1&#160;</span>He went out from there. He came into his own country, and his disciples followed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_2">2&#160;</span>When the Sabbath had come, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing him were astonished, saying, “Where did this man get these things?” and, “What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such mighty works come about by his hands? 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_3">3&#160;</span>Isn’t this the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James, Joses, Judah, and Simon? Aren’t his sisters here with us?” So they were offended at him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_4">4&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_5">5&#160;</span>He could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_6">6&#160;</span>He marveled because of their unbelief. </div>
<div class='p'>He went around the villages teaching. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_7">7&#160;</span>He called to himself the twelve, and began to send them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_8">8&#160;</span>He commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, except a staff only: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_9">9&#160;</span>but to wear sandals, and not put on two tunics. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_10">10&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever will not receive you nor hear you, as you depart from there, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them. Assuredly, I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_12">12&#160;</span>They went out and preached that people should repent. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_13">13&#160;</span>They cast out many demons, and anointed many with oil who were sick and healed them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_14">14&#160;</span>King Herod heard this, for his name had become known, and he said, “John the Baptizer has risen from the dead, and therefore these powers are at work in him.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_15">15&#160;</span>But others said, “He is Elijah.” Others said, “He is a prophet, or like one of the prophets.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_16">16&#160;</span>But Herod, when he heard this, said, “This is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen from the dead.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_17">17&#160;</span>For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, for he had married her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_18">18&#160;</span>For John had said to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_19">19&#160;</span>Herodias set herself against him and desired to kill him, but she couldn’t, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_20">20&#160;</span>for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. When he heard him, he did many things, and he heard him gladly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_21">21&#160;</span>Then a convenient day came when Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles, the high officers, and the chief men of Galilee. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_22">22&#160;</span>When the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those sitting with him. The king said to the young lady, “Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_23">23&#160;</span>He swore to her, “Whatever you ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_24">24&#160;</span>She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask?” </div>
<div class='p'>She said, “The head of John the Baptizer.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_25">25&#160;</span>She came in immediately with haste to the king and requested, “I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_26">26&#160;</span>The king was exceedingly sorry, but for the sake of his oaths and of his dinner guests, he didn’t wish to refuse her. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_27">27&#160;</span>Immediately the king sent out a soldier of his guard and commanded to bring John’s head; and he went and beheaded him in the prison, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_28">28&#160;</span>and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the young lady; and the young lady gave it to her mother. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_29">29&#160;</span>When his disciples heard this, they came and took up his corpse and laid it in a tomb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_30">30&#160;</span>The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus, and they told him all things, whatever they had done, and whatever they had taught. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_31">31&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Come away into a deserted place, and rest awhile.”</span> For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_32">32&#160;</span>They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_33">33&#160;</span>They<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> saw them going, and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities. They arrived before them and came together to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_34">34&#160;</span>Jesus came out, saw a great multitude, and he had compassion on them because they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_35">35&#160;</span>When it was late in the day, his disciples came to him and said, “This place is deserted, and it is late in the day. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_36">36&#160;</span>Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_37">37&#160;</span>But he answered them, <span class='wj'>“You give them something to eat.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They asked him, “Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> worth of bread and give them something to eat?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_38">38&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“How many loaves do you have? Go see.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>When they knew, they said, “Five, and two fish.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_39">39&#160;</span>He commanded them that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_40">40&#160;</span>They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_41">41&#160;</span>He took the five loaves and the two fish; and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves, and he gave to his disciples to set before them, and he divided the two fish among them all. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_42">42&#160;</span>They all ate and were filled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_43">43&#160;</span>They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_44">44&#160;</span>Those who ate the loaves were<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> five thousand men. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_45">45&#160;</span>Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the multitude away. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_46">46&#160;</span>After he had taken leave of them, he went up the mountain to pray. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_47">47&#160;</span>When evening had come, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he was alone on the land. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_48">48&#160;</span>Seeing them distressed in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea; <a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> and he would have passed by them, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_49">49&#160;</span>but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out; 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_50">50&#160;</span>for they all saw him and were troubled. But he immediately spoke with them and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Cheer up! It is I!</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>Don’t be afraid.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_51">51&#160;</span>He got into the boat with them; and the wind ceased, and they were very amazed among themselves, and marveled; 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_52">52&#160;</span>for they hadn’t understood about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK6_53">53&#160;</span>When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret and moored to the shore. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_54">54&#160;</span>When they had come out of the boat, immediately the people recognized him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_55">55&#160;</span>and ran around that whole region, and began to bring those who were sick on their mats to where they heard he was. 
<span class="verse" id="MK6_56">56&#160;</span>Wherever he entered—into villages, or into cities, or into the country—they laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged him that they might just touch the fringe<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_1">1&#160;</span>Then the Pharisees and some of the scribes gathered together to him, having come from Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_2">2&#160;</span>Now when they saw some of his disciples eating bread with defiled, that is unwashed, hands, they found fault. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_3">3&#160;</span>(For the Pharisees and all the Jews don’t eat unless they wash their hands and forearms, holding to the tradition of the elders. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_4">4&#160;</span>They don’t eat when they come from the marketplace unless they bathe themselves, and there are many other things which they have received to hold to: washings of cups, pitchers, bronze vessels, and couches.) 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_5">5&#160;</span>The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, “Why don’t your disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_6">6&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written,</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>‘This people honors me with their lips,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>but their heart is far from me.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They worship me in vain,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.’</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“For you set aside the commandment of God, and hold tightly to the tradition of men—the washing of pitchers and cups, and you do many other such things.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_9">9&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Full well do you reject the commandment of God, that you may keep your tradition. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother;’</span><a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>and, ‘He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.’</span><a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you say, ‘If a man tells his father or his mother, “Whatever profit you might have received from me is Corban,” ’ ”</span><a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> that is to say, given to God, 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“then you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>making void the word of God by your tradition which you have handed down. You do many things like this.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_14">14&#160;</span>He called all the multitude to himself and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Hear me, all of you, and understand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>There is nothing from outside of the man that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out of the man are those that defile the man. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!”</span><a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_17">17&#160;</span>When he had entered into a house away from the multitude, his disciples asked him about the parable. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_18">18&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Are you also without understanding? Don’t you perceive that whatever goes into the man from outside can’t defile him, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>because it doesn’t go into his heart, but into his stomach, then into the latrine, making all foods clean?”</span><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_20">20&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“That which proceeds out of the man, that defiles the man. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, sexual sins, murders, thefts, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>covetings, wickedness, deceit, lustful desires, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, and foolishness. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>All these evil things come from within and defile the man.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_24">24&#160;</span>From there he arose and went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He entered into a house and didn’t want anyone to know it, but he couldn’t escape notice. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_25">25&#160;</span>For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his feet. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_26">26&#160;</span>Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. She begged him that he would cast the demon out of her daughter. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_27">27&#160;</span>But Jesus said to her, <span class='wj'>“Let the children be filled first, for it is not appropriate to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_28">28&#160;</span>But she answered him, “Yes, Lord. Yet even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_29">29&#160;</span>He said to her, <span class='wj'>“For this saying, go your way. The demon has gone out of your daughter.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_30">30&#160;</span>She went away to her house, and found the child having been laid on the bed, with the demon gone out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK7_31">31&#160;</span>Again he departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee through the middle of the region of Decapolis. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_32">32&#160;</span>They brought to him one who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech. They begged him to lay his hand on him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_33">33&#160;</span>He took him aside from the multitude privately and put his fingers into his ears; and he spat and touched his tongue. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_34">34&#160;</span>Looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to him, <span class='wj'>“Ephphatha!” </span> that is, <span class='wj'>“Be opened!”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_35">35&#160;</span>Immediately his ears were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was released, and he spoke clearly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_36">36&#160;</span>He commanded them that they should tell no one, but the more he commanded them, so much the more widely they proclaimed it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK7_37">37&#160;</span>They were astonished beyond measure, saying, “He has done all things well. He makes even the deaf hear and the mute speak!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_1">1&#160;</span>In those days, when there was a very great multitude, and they had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to himself and said to them, 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I have compassion on the multitude, because they have stayed with me now three days and have nothing to eat. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If I send them away fasting to their home, they will faint on the way, for some of them have come a long way.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_4">4&#160;</span>His disciples answered him, “From where could one satisfy these people with bread here in a deserted place?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_5">5&#160;</span>He asked them, <span class='wj'>“How many loaves do you have?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Seven.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_6">6&#160;</span>He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven loaves. Having given thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to serve, and they served the multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_7">7&#160;</span>They also had a few small fish. Having blessed them, he said to serve these also. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_8">8&#160;</span>They ate and were filled. They took up seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_9">9&#160;</span>Those who had eaten were about four thousand. Then he sent them away. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_10">10&#160;</span>Immediately he entered into the boat with his disciples and came into the region of Dalmanutha. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_11">11&#160;</span>The Pharisees came out and began to question him, seeking from him a sign from heaven and testing him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_12">12&#160;</span>He sighed deeply in his spirit and said, <span class='wj'>“Why does this generation</span><a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>seek a sign? Most certainly I tell you, no sign will be given to this generation.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_13">13&#160;</span>He left them, and again entering into the boat, departed to the other side. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_14">14&#160;</span>They forgot to take bread; and they didn’t have more than one loaf in the boat with them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_15">15&#160;</span>He warned them, saying, <span class='wj'>“Take heed: beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_16">16&#160;</span>They reasoned with one another, saying, “It’s because we have no bread.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus, perceiving it, said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you reason that it’s because you have no bread? Don’t you perceive yet or understand? Is your heart still hardened? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Having eyes, don’t you see? Having ears, don’t you hear? Don’t you remember? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They told him, “Twelve.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When the seven loaves fed the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They told him, “Seven.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_21">21&#160;</span>He asked them, <span class='wj'>“Don’t you understand yet?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_22">22&#160;</span>He came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to him and begged him to touch him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_23">23&#160;</span>He took hold of the blind man by the hand, and brought him out of the village. When he had spat on his eyes, and laid his hands on him, he asked him if he saw anything. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_24">24&#160;</span>He looked up, and said, “I see men, but I see them like walking trees.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_25">25&#160;</span>Then again he laid his hands on his eyes. He looked intently, and was restored, and saw everyone clearly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_26">26&#160;</span>He sent him away to his house, saying, <span class='wj'>“Don’t enter into the village, nor tell anyone in the village.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_27">27&#160;</span>Jesus went out, with his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples, <span class='wj'>“Who do men say that I am?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_28">28&#160;</span>They told him, “John the Baptizer, and others say Elijah, but others, one of the prophets.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_29">29&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“But who do you say that I am?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>Peter answered, “You are the Christ.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_30">30&#160;</span>He commanded them that they should tell no one about him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_31">31&#160;</span>He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_32">32&#160;</span>He spoke to them openly. Peter took him and began to rebuke him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_33">33&#160;</span>But he, turning around and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, and said, <span class='wj'>“Get behind me, Satan! For you have in mind not the things of God, but the things of men.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK8_34">34&#160;</span>He called the multitude to himself with his disciples and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Whoever wants to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever wants to save his life will lose it; and whoever will lose his life for my sake and the sake of the Good News will save it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his life? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For what will a man give in exchange for his life? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK8_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_1">1&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste death until they see God’s Kingdom come with power.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_2">2&#160;</span>After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up onto a high mountain privately by themselves, and he was changed into another form in front of them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_3">3&#160;</span>His clothing became glistening, exceedingly white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth can whiten them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_4">4&#160;</span>Elijah and Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_5">5&#160;</span>Peter answered Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let’s make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_6">6&#160;</span>For he didn’t know what to say, for they were very afraid. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_7">7&#160;</span>A cloud came, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_8">8&#160;</span>Suddenly looking around, they saw no one with them any more, except Jesus only. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_9">9&#160;</span>As they were coming down from the mountain, he commanded them that they should tell no one what things they had seen, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_10">10&#160;</span>They kept this saying to themselves, questioning what the “rising from the dead” meant. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_11">11&#160;</span>They asked him, saying, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_12">12&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Elijah indeed comes first, and restores all things. How is it written about the Son of Man, that he should suffer many things and be despised? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to, even as it is written about him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_14">14&#160;</span>Coming to the disciples, he saw a great multitude around them, and scribes questioning them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_15">15&#160;</span>Immediately all the multitude, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him, greeted him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_16">16&#160;</span>He asked the scribes, <span class='wj'>“What are you asking them?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_17">17&#160;</span>One of the multitude answered, “Teacher, I brought to you my son, who has a mute spirit; 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_18">18&#160;</span>and wherever it seizes him, it throws him down; and he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to cast it out, and they weren’t able.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_19">19&#160;</span>He answered him, <span class='wj'>“Unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him to me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_20">20&#160;</span>They brought him to him, and when he saw him, immediately the spirit convulsed him and he fell on the ground, wallowing and foaming at the mouth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_21">21&#160;</span>He asked his father, <span class='wj'>“How long has it been since this has been happening to him?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “From childhood. 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_22">22&#160;</span>Often it has cast him both into the fire and into the water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have compassion on us and help us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“If you can believe, all things are possible to him who believes.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_24">24&#160;</span>Immediately the father of the child cried out with tears, “I believe. Help my unbelief!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_25">25&#160;</span>When Jesus saw that a multitude came running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him, <span class='wj'>“You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him again!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_26">26&#160;</span>After crying out and convulsing him greatly, it came out of him. The boy became like one dead, so much that most of them said, “He is dead.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_27">27&#160;</span>But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up; and he arose. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_28">28&#160;</span>When he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_29">29&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“This kind can come out by nothing but by prayer and fasting.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_30">30&#160;</span>They went out from there and passed through Galilee. He didn’t want anyone to know it, 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_31">31&#160;</span>for he was teaching his disciples, and said to them, <span class='wj'>“The Son of Man is being handed over to the hands of men, and they will kill him; and when he is killed, on the third day he will rise again.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_32">32&#160;</span>But they didn’t understand the saying, and were afraid to ask him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_33">33&#160;</span>He came to Capernaum, and when he was in the house he asked them, <span class='wj'>“What were you arguing among yourselves on the way?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_34">34&#160;</span>But they were silent, for they had disputed with one another on the way about who was the greatest. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_35">35&#160;</span>He sat down and called the twelve; and he said to them, <span class='wj'>“If any man wants to be first, he shall be last of all, and servant of all.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_36">36&#160;</span>He took a little child and set him in the middle of them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them, 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me; and whoever receives me, doesn’t receive me, but him who sent me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_38">38&#160;</span>John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone who doesn’t follow us casting out demons in your name; and we forbade him, because he doesn’t follow us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_39">39&#160;</span>But Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Don’t forbid him, for there is no one who will do a mighty work in my name and be able quickly to speak evil of me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever is not against us is on our side. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_41">41&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my name because you are Christ’s, most certainly I tell you, he will in no way lose his reward. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK9_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if he were thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around his neck. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than having your two hands to go into Gehenna, </span><a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>into the unquenchable fire, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’ </span><a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a><a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame, rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna, </span><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>into the fire that will never be quenched—</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_46">46&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’ </span><a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_47">47&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If your eye causes you to stumble, throw it out. It is better for you to enter into God’s Kingdom with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna</span><a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>of fire, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_48">48&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’ </span><a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK9_50">50&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.” </span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_1">1&#160;</span>He arose from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan. Multitudes came together to him again. As he usually did, he was again teaching them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_2">2&#160;</span>Pharisees came to him testing him, and asked him, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_3">3&#160;</span>He answered, <span class='wj'>“What did Moses command you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_4">4&#160;</span>They said, “Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written, and to divorce her.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_5">5&#160;</span>But Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“For your hardness of heart, he wrote you this commandment. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.</span><a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and the two will become one flesh,</span><a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>so that they are no longer two, but one flesh. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_10">10&#160;</span>In the house, his disciples asked him again about the same matter. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_11">11&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If a woman herself divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_13">13&#160;</span>They were bringing to him little children, that he should touch them, but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_14">14&#160;</span>But when Jesus saw it, he was moved with indignation and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Allow the little children to come to me! Don’t forbid them, for God’s Kingdom belongs to such as these. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, whoever will not receive God’s Kingdom like a little child, he will in no way enter into it.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_16">16&#160;</span>He took them in his arms and blessed them, laying his hands on them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_17">17&#160;</span>As he was going out into the way, one ran to him, knelt before him, and asked him, “Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_18">18&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Why do you call me good? No one is good except one—God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder,’ ‘Do not commit adultery,’ ‘Do not steal,’ ‘Do not give false testimony,’ ‘Do not defraud,’ ‘Honor your father and mother.’ ”</span><a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_20">20&#160;</span>He said to him, “Teacher, I have observed all these things from my youth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_21">21&#160;</span>Jesus looking at him loved him, and said to him, <span class='wj'>“One thing you lack. Go, sell whatever you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, taking up the cross.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_22">22&#160;</span>But his face fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful, for he was one who had great possessions. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_23">23&#160;</span>Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into God’s Kingdom!”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_24">24&#160;</span>The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again, <span class='wj'>“Children, how hard it is for those who trust in riches to enter into God’s Kingdom! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into God’s Kingdom.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_26">26&#160;</span>They were exceedingly astonished, saying to him, “Then who can be saved?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_27">27&#160;</span>Jesus, looking at them, said, <span class='wj'>“With men it is impossible, but not with God, for all things are possible with God.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_28">28&#160;</span>Peter began to tell him, “Behold, we have left all and have followed you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and for the sake of the Good News, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but he will receive one hundred times more now in this time: houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and land, with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_32">32&#160;</span>They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going in front of them, and they were amazed; and those who followed were afraid. He again took the twelve, and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They will mock him, spit on him, scourge him, and kill him. On the third day he will rise again.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_35">35&#160;</span>James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came near to him, saying, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we will ask.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_36">36&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“What do you want me to do for you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_37">37&#160;</span>They said to him, “Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right hand and one at your left hand, in your glory.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_38">38&#160;</span>But Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“You don’t know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_39">39&#160;</span>They said to him, “We are able.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink, and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_41">41&#160;</span>When the ten heard it, they began to be indignant toward James and John. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_42">42&#160;</span>Jesus summoned them and said to them, <span class='wj'>“You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_43">43&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But it shall not be so among you, but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whoever of you wants to become first among you shall be bondservant of all. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_45">45&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Son of Man also came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_46">46&#160;</span>They came to Jericho. As he went out from Jericho with his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the road. 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_47">47&#160;</span>When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!” 
<span class="verse" id="MK10_48">48&#160;</span>Many rebuked him, that he should be quiet, but he cried out much more, “You son of David, have mercy on me!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_49">49&#160;</span>Jesus stood still and said, <span class='wj'>“Call him.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They called the blind man, saying to him, “Cheer up! Get up. He is calling you!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_50">50&#160;</span>He, casting away his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_51">51&#160;</span>Jesus asked him, <span class='wj'>“What do you want me to do for you?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>The blind man said to him, “Rabboni,<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> that I may see again.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK10_52">52&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Go your way. Your faith has made you well.” </span> Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus on the way.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_1">1&#160;</span>When they came near to Jerusalem, to Bethsphage<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_2">2&#160;</span>and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Go your way into the village that is opposite you. Immediately as you enter into it, you will find a young donkey tied, on which no one has sat. Untie him and bring him. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs him;’ and immediately he will send him back here.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_4">4&#160;</span>They went away, and found a young donkey tied at the door outside in the open street, and they untied him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_5">5&#160;</span>Some of those who stood there asked them, “What are you doing, untying the young donkey?” 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_6">6&#160;</span>They said to them just as Jesus had said, and they let them go. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_7">7&#160;</span>They brought the young donkey to Jesus and threw their garments on it, and Jesus sat on it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_8">8&#160;</span>Many spread their garments on the way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_9">9&#160;</span>Those who went in front and those who followed cried out, “Hosanna!<a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_10">10&#160;</span>Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_11">11&#160;</span>Jesus entered into the temple in Jerusalem. When he had looked around at everything, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_12">12&#160;</span>The next day, when they had come out from Bethany, he was hungry. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_13">13&#160;</span>Seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came to see if perhaps he might find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_14">14&#160;</span>Jesus told it, <span class='wj'>“May no one ever eat fruit from you again!” </span> and his disciples heard it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_15">15&#160;</span>They came to Jerusalem, and Jesus entered into the temple and began to throw out those who sold and those who bought in the temple, and overthrew the money changers’ tables and the seats of those who sold the doves. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_16">16&#160;</span>He would not allow anyone to carry a container through the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_17">17&#160;</span>He taught, saying to them, <span class='wj'>“Isn’t it written, ‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations?’</span><a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>But you have made it a den of robbers!”</span><a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_18">18&#160;</span>The chief priests and the scribes heard it, and sought how they might destroy him. For they feared him, because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_19">19&#160;</span>When evening came, he went out of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_20">20&#160;</span>As they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_21">21&#160;</span>Peter, remembering, said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree which you cursed has withered away.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_22">22&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Have faith in God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For most certainly I tell you, whoever may tell this mountain, ‘Be taken up and cast into the sea,’ and doesn’t doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says is happening, he shall have whatever he says. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore I tell you, all things whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received them, and you shall have them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against anyone; so that your Father, who is in heaven, may also forgive you your transgressions. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your transgressions.”</span><a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_27">27&#160;</span>They came again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders came to him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_28">28&#160;</span>and they began saying to him, “By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The baptism of John—was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK11_31">31&#160;</span>They reasoned with themselves, saying, “If we should say, ‘From heaven;’ he will say, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’ 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_32">32&#160;</span>If we should say, ‘From men’ ”—they feared the people, for all held John to really be a prophet. 
<span class="verse" id="MK11_33">33&#160;</span>They answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_1">1&#160;</span>He began to speak to them in parables. <span class='wj'>“A man planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a pit for the wine press, built a tower, rented it out to a farmer, and went into another country. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When it was time, he sent a servant to the farmer to get from the farmer his share of the fruit of the vineyard. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They took him, beat him, and sent him away empty. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again, he sent another servant to them; and they threw stones at him, wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully treated. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Again he sent another, and they killed him, and many others, beating some, and killing some. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore still having one, his beloved son, he sent him last to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But those farmers said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>They took him, killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Haven’t you even read this Scripture:</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>‘The stone which the builders rejected</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>was made the head of the corner.</span> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>This was from the Lord.</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>It is marvelous in our eyes’?”</span><a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_12">12&#160;</span>They tried to seize him, but they feared the multitude; for they perceived that he spoke the parable against them. They left him and went away. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_13">13&#160;</span>They sent some of the Pharisees and the Herodians to him, that they might trap him with words. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_14">14&#160;</span>When they had come, they asked him, “Teacher, we know that you are honest, and don’t defer to anyone; for you aren’t partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not? 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_15">15&#160;</span>Shall we give, or shall we not give?” </div>
<div class='p'>But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, <span class='wj'>“Why do you test me? Bring me a denarius, that I may see it.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_16">16&#160;</span>They brought it. </div>
<div class='p'>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Whose is this image and inscription?”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They said to him, “Caesar’s.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_17">17&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>They marveled greatly at him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_18">18&#160;</span>Some Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection, came to him. They asked him, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_19">19&#160;</span>“Teacher, Moses wrote to us, ‘If a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife behind him, and leaves no children, that his brother should take his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’ 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_20">20&#160;</span>There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and dying left no offspring. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_21">21&#160;</span>The second took her, and died, leaving no children behind him. The third likewise; 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_22">22&#160;</span>and the seven took her and left no children. Last of all the woman also died. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_23">23&#160;</span>In the resurrection, when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as a wife.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_24">24&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Isn’t this because you are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For when they will rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But about the dead, that they are raised, haven’t you read in the book of Moses about the Bush, how God spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?</span><a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are therefore badly mistaken.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_28">28&#160;</span>One of the scribes came and heard them questioning together, and knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, “Which commandment is the greatest of all?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_29">29&#160;</span>Jesus answered, <span class='wj'>“The greatest is: ‘Hear, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’</span><a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>This is the first commandment. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The second is like this: ‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’</span><a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>There is no other commandment greater than these.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_32">32&#160;</span>The scribe said to him, “Truly, teacher, you have said well that he is one, and there is none other but he; 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_33">33&#160;</span>and to love him with all the heart, with all the understanding, all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more important than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_34">34&#160;</span>When Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said to him, <span class='wj'>“You are not far from God’s Kingdom.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>No one dared ask him any question after that. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_35">35&#160;</span>Jesus responded, as he taught in the temple, <span class='wj'>“How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For David himself said in the Holy Spirit,</span> </div>
<div class='q'><span class='wj'>‘The Lord said to my Lord,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>“Sit at my right hand,</span> </div>
<div class='q2'><span class='wj'>until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.” ’</span><a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Therefore David himself calls him Lord, so how can he be his son?” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>The common people heard him gladly. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_38">38&#160;</span>In his teaching he said to them, <span class='wj'>“Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and to get greetings in the marketplaces, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_39">39&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and to get the best seats in the synagogues and the best places at feasts, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_40">40&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>those who devour widows’ houses, and for a pretense make long prayers. These will receive greater condemnation.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK12_41">41&#160;</span>Jesus sat down opposite the treasury and saw how the multitude cast money into the treasury. Many who were rich cast in much. 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_42">42&#160;</span>A poor widow came and she cast in two small brass coins,<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> which equal a quadrans coin.<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_43">43&#160;</span>He called his disciples to himself and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, this poor widow gave more than all those who are giving into the treasury, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK12_44">44&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>for they all gave out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, gave all that she had to live on.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_1">1&#160;</span>As he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_2">2&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Do you see these great buildings? There will not be left here one stone on another, which will not be thrown down.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_3">3&#160;</span>As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately, 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_4">4&#160;</span>“Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign that these things are all about to be fulfilled?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_5">5&#160;</span>Jesus, answering, began to tell them, <span class='wj'>“Be careful that no one leads you astray. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’</span><a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>and will lead many astray.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, don’t be troubled. For those must happen, but the end is not yet. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places. There will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginning of birth pains. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But watch yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils. You will be beaten in synagogues. You will stand before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The Good News must first be preached to all the nations. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>When they lead you away and deliver you up, don’t be anxious beforehand or premeditate what you will say, but say whatever will be given you in that hour. For it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You will be hated by all men for my name’s sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But when you see the abomination of desolation,</span><a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not”</span> (let the reader understand), <span class='wj'>“then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and let him who is on the housetop not go down, nor enter in, to take anything out of his house. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Let him who is in the field not return back to take his cloak. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But woe to those who are with child and to those who nurse babies in those days! </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Pray that your flight won’t be in the winter. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For in those days there will be oppression, such as there has not been the like from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, and never will be. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the sake of the chosen ones, whom he picked out, he shortened the days. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then if anyone tells you, ‘Look, here is the Christ!’ or, ‘Look, there!’ don’t believe it. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For false christs and false prophets will arise and will show signs and wonders, that they may lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But you watch.</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“Behold, I have told you all things beforehand. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But in those days, after that oppression, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>the stars will be falling from the sky, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.</span><a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Then he will send out his angels, and will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the sky.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Now from the fig tree, learn this parable. When the branch has now become tender and produces its leaves, you know that the summer is near; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>even so you also, when you see these things coming to pass, know that it is near, at the doors. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_30">30&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I say to you, this generation</span><a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>will not pass away until all these things happen. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_31">31&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_32">32&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“But of that day or that hour no one knows—not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_33">33&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch, keep alert, and pray; for you don’t know when the time is. </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK13_34">34&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“It is like a man traveling to another country, having left his house and given authority to his servants, and to each one his work, and also commanded the doorkeeper to keep watch. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_35">35&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch therefore, for you don’t know when the lord of the house is coming—whether at evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or in the morning; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_36">36&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>lest, coming suddenly, he might find you sleeping. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK13_37">37&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>What I tell you, I tell all: Watch!”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_1">1&#160;</span>It was now two days before the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might seize him by deception and kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_2">2&#160;</span>For they said, “Not during the feast, because there might be a riot among the people.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_3">3&#160;</span>While he was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at the table, a woman came having an alabaster jar of ointment of pure nard—very costly. She broke the jar and poured it over his head. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_4">4&#160;</span>But there were some who were indignant among themselves, saying, “Why has this ointment been wasted? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_5">5&#160;</span>For this might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii<a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and given to the poor.” So they grumbled against her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_6">6&#160;</span>But Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want to, you can do them good; but you will not always have me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>She has done what she could. She has anointed my body beforehand for the burying. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, wherever this Good News may be preached throughout the whole world, that which this woman has done will also be spoken of for a memorial of her.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_10">10&#160;</span>Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, that he might deliver him to them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_11">11&#160;</span>They, when they heard it, were glad, and promised to give him money. He sought how he might conveniently deliver him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_12">12&#160;</span>On the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, his disciples asked him, “Where do you want us to go and prepare that you may eat the Passover?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_13">13&#160;</span>He sent two of his disciples and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Go into the city, and there a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and wherever he enters in, tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?” ’ </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready. Get ready for us there.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_16">16&#160;</span>His disciples went out, and came into the city, and found things as he had said to them, and they prepared the Passover. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_17">17&#160;</span>When it was evening he came with the twelve. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_18">18&#160;</span>As they sat and were eating, Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you, one of you will betray me—he who eats with me.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_19">19&#160;</span>They began to be sorrowful, and to ask him one by one, “Surely not I?” And another said, “Surely not I?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_20">20&#160;</span>He answered them, <span class='wj'>“It is one of the twelve, he who dips with me in the dish. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>For the Son of Man goes as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_22">22&#160;</span>As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed it, he broke it and gave to them, and said, <span class='wj'>“Take, eat. This is my body.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_23">23&#160;</span>He took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to them. They all drank of it. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_24">24&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Most certainly I tell you, I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in God’s Kingdom.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_26">26&#160;</span>When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_27">27&#160;</span>Jesus said to them, <span class='wj'>“All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, ‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’</span><a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>However, after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_29">29&#160;</span>But Peter said to him, “Although all will be offended, yet I will not.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_30">30&#160;</span>Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Most certainly I tell you that you today, even this night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_31">31&#160;</span>But he spoke all the more, “If I must die with you, I will not deny you.” They all said the same thing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_32">32&#160;</span>They came to a place which was named Gethsemane. He said to his disciples, <span class='wj'>“Sit here while I pray.”</span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_33">33&#160;</span>He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be greatly troubled and distressed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_34">34&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here and watch.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_35">35&#160;</span>He went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_36">36&#160;</span>He said, <span class='wj'>“Abba,</span><a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>Father, all things are possible to you. Please remove this cup from me. However, not what I desire, but what you desire.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_37">37&#160;</span>He came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, <span class='wj'>“Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn’t you watch one hour? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_38">38&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Watch and pray, that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_39">39&#160;</span>Again he went away and prayed, saying the same words. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_40">40&#160;</span>Again he returned and found them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy; and they didn’t know what to answer him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_41">41&#160;</span>He came the third time and said to them, <span class='wj'>“Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_42">42&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Arise! Let’s get going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_43">43&#160;</span>Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, came—and with him a multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_44">44&#160;</span>Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, “Whomever I will kiss, that is he. Seize him, and lead him away safely.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_45">45&#160;</span>When he had come, immediately he came to him and said, “Rabbi! Rabbi!” and kissed him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_46">46&#160;</span>They laid their hands on him and seized him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_47">47&#160;</span>But a certain one of those who stood by drew his sword and struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_48">48&#160;</span>Jesus answered them, <span class='wj'>“Have you come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me? </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_49">49&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and you didn’t arrest me. But this is so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_50">50&#160;</span>They all left him, and fled. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_51">51&#160;</span>A certain young man followed him, having a linen cloth thrown around himself over his naked body. The young men grabbed him, 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_52">52&#160;</span>but he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_53">53&#160;</span>They led Jesus away to the high priest. All the chief priests, the elders, and the scribes came together with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_54">54&#160;</span>Peter had followed him from a distance, until he came into the court of the high priest. He was sitting with the officers, and warming himself in the light of the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_55">55&#160;</span>Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witnesses against Jesus to put him to death, and found none. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_56">56&#160;</span>For many gave false testimony against him, and their testimony didn’t agree with each other. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_57">57&#160;</span>Some stood up and gave false testimony against him, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_58">58&#160;</span>“We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_59">59&#160;</span>Even so, their testimony didn’t agree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_60">60&#160;</span>The high priest stood up in the middle, and asked Jesus, “Have you no answer? What is it which these testify against you?” 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_61">61&#160;</span>But he stayed quiet, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, “Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_62">62&#160;</span>Jesus said, <span class='wj'>“I am. You will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of the sky.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_63">63&#160;</span>The high priest tore his clothes and said, “What further need have we of witnesses? 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_64">64&#160;</span>You have heard the blasphemy! What do you think?” They all condemned him to be worthy of death. 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_65">65&#160;</span>Some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to beat him with fists, and to tell him, “Prophesy!” The officers struck him with the palms of their hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_66">66&#160;</span>As Peter was in the courtyard below, one of the maids of the high priest came, 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_67">67&#160;</span>and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked at him and said, “You were also with the Nazarene, Jesus!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_68">68&#160;</span>But he denied it, saying, “I neither know nor understand what you are saying.” He went out on the porch, and the rooster crowed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_69">69&#160;</span>The maid saw him and began again to tell those who stood by, “This is one of them.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_70">70&#160;</span>But he again denied it. After a little while again those who stood by said to Peter, “You truly are one of them, for you are a Galilean, and your speech shows it.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK14_71">71&#160;</span>But he began to curse and to swear, “I don’t know this man of whom you speak!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK14_72">72&#160;</span>The rooster crowed the second time. Peter remembered the words that Jesus said to him, <span class='wj'>“Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.”</span> When he thought about that, he wept.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_1">1&#160;</span>Immediately in the morning the chief priests, with the elders, scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, bound Jesus, carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_2">2&#160;</span>Pilate asked him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, <span class='wj'>“So you say.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_3">3&#160;</span>The chief priests accused him of many things. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_4">4&#160;</span>Pilate again asked him, “Have you no answer? See how many things they testify against you!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_5">5&#160;</span>But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate marveled. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_6">6&#160;</span>Now at the feast he used to release to them one prisoner, whomever they asked of him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_7">7&#160;</span>There was one called Barabbas, bound with his fellow insurgents, men who in the insurrection had committed murder. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_8">8&#160;</span>The multitude, crying aloud, began to ask him to do as he always did for them. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_9">9&#160;</span>Pilate answered them, saying, “Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?” 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_10">10&#160;</span>For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_11">11&#160;</span>But the chief priests stirred up the multitude, that he should release Barabbas to them instead. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_12">12&#160;</span>Pilate again asked them, “What then should I do to him whom you call the King of the Jews?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_13">13&#160;</span>They cried out again, “Crucify him!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_14">14&#160;</span>Pilate said to them, “Why, what evil has he done?” </div>
<div class='p'>But they cried out exceedingly, “Crucify him!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_15">15&#160;</span>Pilate, wishing to please the multitude, released Barabbas to them, and handed over Jesus, when he had flogged him, to be crucified. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_16">16&#160;</span>The soldiers led him away within the court, which is the Praetorium; and they called together the whole cohort. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_17">17&#160;</span>They clothed him with purple; and weaving a crown of thorns, they put it on him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_18">18&#160;</span>They began to salute him, “Hail, King of the Jews!” 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_19">19&#160;</span>They struck his head with a reed and spat on him, and bowing their knees, did homage to him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_20">20&#160;</span>When they had mocked him, they took the purple cloak off him, and put his own garments on him. They led him out to crucify him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_21">21&#160;</span>They compelled one passing by, coming from the country, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them that he might bear his cross. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_22">22&#160;</span>They brought him to the place called Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, “The place of a skull.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_23">23&#160;</span>They offered him wine mixed with myrrh to drink, but he didn’t take it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_24">24&#160;</span>Crucifying him, they parted his garments among them, casting lots on them, what each should take. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_25">25&#160;</span>It was the third hour<a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> when they crucified him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_26">26&#160;</span>The superscription of his accusation was written over him: “THE KING OF THE JEWS.” 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_27">27&#160;</span>With him they crucified two robbers, one on his right hand, and one on his left. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_28">28&#160;</span>The Scripture was fulfilled which says, “He was counted with transgressors.”<a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_29">29&#160;</span>Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads and saying, “Ha! You who destroy the temple and build it in three days, 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_30">30&#160;</span>save yourself, and come down from the cross!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_31">31&#160;</span>Likewise, also the chief priests mocking among themselves with the scribes said, “He saved others. He can’t save himself. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_32">32&#160;</span>Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe him.”<a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Those who were crucified with him also insulted him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_33">33&#160;</span>When the sixth hour<a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> had come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.<a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_34">34&#160;</span>At the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, <span class='wj'>“Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?”</span> which is, being interpreted, <span class='wj'>“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”</span> <a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_35">35&#160;</span>Some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, “Behold, he is calling Elijah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_36">36&#160;</span>One ran, and filling a sponge full of vinegar, put it on a reed and gave it to him to drink, saying, “Let him be. Let’s see whether Elijah comes to take him down.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_37">37&#160;</span>Jesus cried out with a loud voice, and gave up the spirit. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_38">38&#160;</span>The veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_39">39&#160;</span>When the centurion, who stood by opposite him, saw that he cried out like this and breathed his last, he said, “Truly this man was the Son of God!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_40">40&#160;</span>There were also women watching from afar, among whom were both Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome; 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_41">41&#160;</span>who, when he was in Galilee, followed him and served him; and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK15_42">42&#160;</span>When evening had now come, because it was the Preparation Day, that is, the day before the Sabbath, 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_43">43&#160;</span>Joseph of Arimathaea, a prominent council member who also himself was looking for God’s Kingdom, came. He boldly went in to Pilate, and asked for Jesus’ body. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_44">44&#160;</span>Pilate was surprised to hear that he was already dead; and summoning the centurion, he asked him whether he had been dead long. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_45">45&#160;</span>When he found out from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_46">46&#160;</span>He bought a linen cloth, and taking him down, wound him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of a rock. He rolled a stone against the door of the tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="MK15_47">47&#160;</span>Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses, saw where he was laid.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='MK16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_1">1&#160;</span>When the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices, that they might come and anoint him. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_2">2&#160;</span>Very early on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb when the sun had risen. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_3">3&#160;</span>They were saying among themselves, “Who will roll away the stone from the door of the tomb for us?” 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_4">4&#160;</span>for it was very big. Looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_5">5&#160;</span>Entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, dressed in a white robe; and they were amazed. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_6">6&#160;</span>He said to them, “Don’t be amazed. You seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified. He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him! 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_7">7&#160;</span>But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He goes before you into Galilee. There you will see him, as he said to you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_8">8&#160;</span>They went out,<a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had come on them. They said nothing to anyone; for they were afraid.<a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_9">9&#160;</span> <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>Now when he had risen early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_10">10&#160;</span>She went and told those who had been with him, as they mourned and wept. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_11">11&#160;</span>When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they disbelieved. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_12">12&#160;</span>After these things he was revealed in another form to two of them as they walked, on their way into the country. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_13">13&#160;</span>They went away and told it to the rest. They didn’t believe them, either. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_14">14&#160;</span>Afterward he was revealed to the eleven themselves as they sat at the table; and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they didn’t believe those who had seen him after he had risen. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_15">15&#160;</span>He said to them, <span class='wj'>“Go into all the world and preach the Good News to the whole creation. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who disbelieves will be condemned. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new languages; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>they will take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it will in no way hurt them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="MK16_19">19&#160;</span>So then the Lord,<a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> after he had spoken to them, was received up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God. 
<span class="verse" id="MK16_20">20&#160;</span>They went out and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them and confirming the word by the signs that followed. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:2</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “ἰδοὺ”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_2"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:2</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='MAL.xhtml#ML3_1'>Malachi 3:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_3"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:3</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_3'>Isaiah 40:3</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:4</a>
 <span class="ft">or, immersing</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:8</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek word (en) translated here as “in” could also be translated as “with” in some contexts.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK1_31"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:31</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “immediately”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK3_29"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:29</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads, guilty of an eternal sin.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK3_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:32</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “your sisters”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK4_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:4</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “of the air”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK4_12"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 4:12</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_9'>Isaiah 6:9-10</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK4_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:21</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, a modion, a dry measuring basket containing about a peck (about 9 liters)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:33</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “The multitudes” instead of “They”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_37"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6:37</a>
 <span class="ft">200 denarii was about 7 or 8 months wages for an agricultural laborer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_44"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6:44</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “about”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_48"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 6:48</a>
 <span class="xt">See <a class='bibleref' href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_8'>Job 9:8</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_50"><span class="notemark">§</span> 6:50</a>
 <span class="ft">or, “I AM!”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK6_56"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:56</a>
 <span class="ft">or, tassel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_7"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:7</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_13'>Isaiah 29:13</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_10"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:10</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exodus 20:12</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>Deuteronomy 5:16</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_10"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 7:10</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX21_17'>Exodus 21:17</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_9'>Leviticus 20:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Corban is a Hebrew word for an offering devoted to God.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:16</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 16.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK7_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 7:19</a>
 <span class="ft">NU ends Jesus’ direct quote and question after “latrine”, ending the verse with “Thus he declared all foods clean. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK8_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:12</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “generation” here (genea) could also be translated “people”, “race”, or “family”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_43"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:43</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_44"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 9:44</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_24'>Isaiah 66:24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_44"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:44</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 44.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_45"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:45</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_46"><span class="notemark">§</span> 9:46</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 46.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_47"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:47</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK9_48"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 9:48</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_24'>Isaiah 66:24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK10_6"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:6</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN1_27'>Genesis 1:27</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK10_8"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:8</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='GEN.xhtml#GN2_24'>Genesis 2:24</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK10_19"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 10:19</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX20_12'>Exodus 20:12-16</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT5_16'>Deuteronomy 5:16-20</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK10_51"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:51</a>
 <span class="ft">Rabboni is a transliteration of the Hebrew word for “great teacher.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:1</a>
 <span class="ft">TR &amp; NU read “Bethphage” instead of “Bethsphage”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11:9</a>
 <span class="ft">“Hosanna” means “save us” or “help us, we pray”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_9"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:9</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_25'>Psalm 118:25-26</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_7'>Isaiah 56:7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_17"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 11:17</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='JER.xhtml#JR7_11'>Jeremiah 7:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK11_26"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 11:26</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 26.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_11"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:11</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS118_22'>Psalm 118:22-23</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_26"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:26</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX3_6'>Exodus 3:6</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_30"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:30</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT6_4'>Deuteronomy 6:4-5</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_31"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:31</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_18'>Leviticus 19:18</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_36"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 12:36</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS110_1'>Psalm 110:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:42</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, lepta (or widow’s mites). Lepta are very small brass coins worth half a quadrans each, which is a quarter of the copper assarion. Lepta are worth less than 1% of an agricultural worker’s daily wages.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK12_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12:42</a>
 <span class="ft">A quadrans is a coin worth about 1/64 of a denarius. A denarius is about one day’s wages for an agricultural laborer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK13_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:6</a>
 <span class="ft">or, “I AM!”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK13_14"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:14</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN9_17'>Daniel 9:17</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN11_31'>11:31</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN12_11'>12:11</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK13_25"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 13:25</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_10'>Isaiah 13:10</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_4'>34:4</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK13_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:30</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “generation” (genea) could also be translated “race”, “family”, or “people”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:5</a>
 <span class="ft">300 denarii was about a year’s wages for an agricultural laborer. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK14_27"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 14:27</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='ZEC.xhtml#ZC13_7'>Zechariah 13:7</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK14_36"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:36</a>
 <span class="ft">Abba is a Greek spelling for the Aramaic word for “Father” or “Daddy” used in a familiar, respectful, and loving way. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:25</a>
 <span class="ft">9:00 a.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:28</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits verse 28.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_32"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15:32</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “him”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_33"><span class="notemark">§</span> 15:33</a>
 <span class="ft">or, noon</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:33</a>
 <span class="ft">3:00 p.m.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK15_34"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 15:34</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS22_1'>Psalm 22:1</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK16_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “quickly”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK16_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:8</a>
 <span class="ft">One isolated manuscript omits verses 9-20 but adds this “short ending of Mark” to the end of verse 8: </span><span class="fqa">They told all that had been commanded them briefly to those around Peter. After that, Jesus himself sent them out, from east to west, with the sacred and imperishable proclamation of eternal salvation.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK16_9"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16:9</a>
 <span class="ft">NU includes the text of verses 9-20, but mentions in a footnote that a few manuscripts omitted it. The translators of the World English Bible regard <a class='bibleref' href='MRK.xhtml#MK16_9'>Mark 16:9-20</a> as reliable based on an overwhelming majority of textual evidence, including not only the authoritative Greek Majority Text New Testament, but also the TR and many of the manuscripts cited in the NU text.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#MK16_19"><span class="notemark">§</span> 16:19</a>
 <span class="ft">NU adds “Jesus”</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
