<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Revelation 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Revelation</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='REV.xhtml#RV22_0'>22</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='RV0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Revelation to John  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="RV1_1">1&#160;</span>This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> which God gave him to show to his servants the things which must happen soon, which he sent and made known by his angel<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to his servant, John, 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_2">2&#160;</span>who testified to God’s word and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, about everything that he saw. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_3">3&#160;</span>Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things that are written in it, for the time is near. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_4">4&#160;</span>John, to the seven assemblies that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace from God, who is and who was and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne; 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_5">5&#160;</span>and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us, and washed us from our sins by his blood— 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_6">6&#160;</span>and he made us to be a Kingdom, priests<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> to his God and Father—to him be the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_7">7&#160;</span>Behold,<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, including those who pierced him. All the tribes of the earth will mourn over him. Even so, Amen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I am the Alpha and the Omega,</span><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a><span class='wj'>”</span> says the Lord God,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>“who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_9">9&#160;</span>I John, your brother and partner with you in the oppression, Kingdom, and perseverance in Christ Jesus, was on the isle that is called Patmos because of God’s Word and the testimony of Jesus Christ. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_10">10&#160;</span>I was in the Spirit on the Lord’s day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like a trumpet 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_11">11&#160;</span>saying,<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a><span class='wj'>“What you see, write in a book and send to the seven assemblies:</span><a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV1_12">12&#160;</span>I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. Having turned, I saw seven golden lamp stands. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_13">13&#160;</span>And among the lamp stands was one like a son of man,<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet, and with a golden sash around his chest. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_14">14&#160;</span>His head and his hair were white as white wool, like snow. His eyes were like a flame of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_15">15&#160;</span>His feet were like burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace. His voice was like the voice of many waters. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_16">16&#160;</span>He had seven stars in his right hand. Out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining at its brightest. 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_17">17&#160;</span>When I saw him, I fell at his feet like a dead man. </div>
<div class='p'>He laid his right hand on me, saying, <span class='wj'>“Don’t be afraid. I am the first and the last, </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and the Living one. I was dead, and behold, I am alive forever and ever. Amen. I have the keys of Death and of Hades.</span><a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Write therefore the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which will happen hereafter. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV1_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>The mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lamp stands is this: The seven stars are the angels</span><a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>of the seven assemblies. The seven lamp stands are seven assemblies.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Ephesus write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“He who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks among the seven golden lamp stands says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works, and your toil and perseverance, and that you can’t tolerate evil men, and have tested those who call themselves apostles, and they are not, and found them false. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>You have perseverance and have endured for my name’s sake, and have </span><a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>not grown weary. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I have this against you, that you left your first love. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent and do the first works; or else I am coming to you swiftly, and will move your lamp stand out of its place, unless you repent. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But this you have, that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes I will give to eat from the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of my God.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Smyrna write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“The first and the last, who was dead, and has come to life says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works, oppression, and your poverty (but you are rich), and the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but are a synagogue of Satan. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Don’t be afraid of the things which you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested; and you will have oppression for ten days. Be faithful to death, and I will give you the crown of life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. He who overcomes won’t be harmed by the second death.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Pergamum write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“He who has the sharp two-edged sword says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works and where you dwell, where Satan’s throne is. You hold firmly to my name, and didn’t deny my faith in the days of Antipas my witness, my faithful one, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I have a few things against you, because you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to throw a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit sexual immorality. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So also you likewise have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.</span><a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Repent therefore, or else I am coming to you quickly and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes, to him I will give of the hidden manna, </span><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> <span class='wj'>and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written which no one knows but he who receives it.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Thyatira write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“The Son of God, who has his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet are like burnished brass, says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV2_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works, your love, faith, service, patient endurance, and that your last works are more than the first. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But I have this against you, that you tolerate your</span><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> <span class='wj'>woman Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess. She teaches and seduces my servants to commit sexual immorality and to eat things sacrificed to idols. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Behold, I will throw her and those who commit adultery with her into a bed of great oppression, unless they repent of her works. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_23">23&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I will kill her children with Death, and all the assemblies will know that I am he who searches the minds and hearts. I will give to each one of you according to your deeds. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_24">24&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But to you I say, to the rest who are in Thyatira—as many as don’t have this teaching, who don’t know what some call ‘the deep things of Satan’—to you I say, I am not putting any other burden on you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_25">25&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Nevertheless, hold that which you have firmly until I come. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_26">26&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who overcomes, and he who keeps my works to the end, to him I will give authority over the nations. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_27">27&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He will rule them with a rod of iron, shattering them like clay pots,</span><a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> <span class='wj'>as I also have received of my Father; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_28">28&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>and I will give him the morning star. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV2_29">29&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV3_1">1&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“And to the angel of the assembly in Sardis write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“He who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven stars says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“I know your works, that you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_2">2&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Wake up and strengthen the things that remain, which you were about to throw away,</span><a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>for I have found no works of yours perfected before my God. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_3">3&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Remember therefore how you have received and heard. Keep it and repent. If therefore you won’t watch, I will come as a thief, and you won’t know what hour I will come upon you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_4">4&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Nevertheless you have a few names in Sardis that didn’t defile their garments. They will walk with me in white, for they are worthy. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_5">5&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who overcomes will be arrayed in white garments, and I will in no way blot his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_6">6&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV3_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“He who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, he who opens and no one can shut, and who shuts and no one opens, says these things: </span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV3_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works (behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one can shut), that you have a little power, and kept my word, and didn’t deny my name. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_9">9&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Behold, I make some of the synagogue of Satan, of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but lie—behold, I will make them to come and worship before your feet, and to know that I have loved you. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_10">10&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Because you kept my command to endure, I also will keep you from the hour of testing which is to come on the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_11">11&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am coming quickly! Hold firmly that which you have, so that no one takes your crown. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will go out from there no more. I will write on him the name of my God and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and my own new name. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV3_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“To the angel of the assembly in Laodicea write:</span> </div>
<div class='p'><span class='wj'>“The Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the Beginning</span><a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>of God’s creation, says these things:</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV3_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or hot. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will vomit you out of my mouth. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_17">17&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Because you say, ‘I am rich, and have gotten riches, and have need of nothing,’ and don’t know that you are the wretched one, miserable, poor, blind, and naked; </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_18">18&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, that you may become rich; and white garments, that you may clothe yourself, and that the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed; and eye salve to anoint your eyes, that you may see. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_19">19&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>As many as I love, I reprove and chasten. Be zealous therefore, and repent. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_20">20&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, then I will come in to him and will dine with him, and he with me. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_21">21&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who overcomes, I will give to him to sit down with me on my throne, as I also overcame and sat down with my Father on his throne. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV3_22">22&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.”</span>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV4_1">1&#160;</span>After these things I looked and saw a door opened in heaven; and the first voice that I heard, like a trumpet speaking with me, was one saying, “Come up here, and I will show you the things which must happen after this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV4_2">2&#160;</span>Immediately I was in the Spirit. Behold, there was a throne set in heaven, and one sitting on the throne 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_3">3&#160;</span>that looked like a jasper stone and a sardius. There was a rainbow around the throne, like an emerald to look at. 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_4">4&#160;</span>Around the throne were twenty-four thrones. On the thrones were twenty-four elders sitting, dressed in white garments, with crowns of gold on their heads. 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_5">5&#160;</span>Out of the throne proceed lightnings, sounds, and thunders. There were seven lamps of fire burning before his throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_6">6&#160;</span>Before the throne was something like a sea of glass, similar to crystal. In the middle of the throne, and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes before and behind. 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_7">7&#160;</span>The first creature was like a lion, the second creature like a calf, the third creature had a face like a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle. 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_8">8&#160;</span>The four living creatures, each one of them having six wings, are full of eyes around and within. They have no rest day and night, saying, “Holy, holy, holy<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV4_9">9&#160;</span>When the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, to him who lives forever and ever, 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_10">10&#160;</span>the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne and worship him who lives forever and ever, and throw their crowns before the throne, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="RV4_11">11&#160;</span>“Worthy are you, our Lord and God, the Holy One,<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> to receive the glory, the honor, and the power, for you created all things, and because of your desire they existed and were created!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_1">1&#160;</span>I saw, in the right hand of him who sat on the throne, a book written inside and outside, sealed shut with seven seals. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_2">2&#160;</span>I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the book, and to break its seals?” 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_3">3&#160;</span>No one in heaven above, or on the earth, or under the earth, was able to open the book or to look in it. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_4">4&#160;</span>Then I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the book or to look in it. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_5">5&#160;</span>One of the elders said to me, “Don’t weep. Behold, the Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome: he who opens the book and its seven seals.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_6">6&#160;</span>I saw in the middle of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the middle of the elders, a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_7">7&#160;</span>Then he came, and he took it out of the right hand of him who sat on the throne. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_8">8&#160;</span>Now when he had taken the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each one having a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints. 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_9">9&#160;</span>They sang a new song, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“You are worthy to take the book </div>
<div class='q2'>and to open its seals, </div>
<div class='q'>for you were killed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bought us for God with your blood </div>
<div class='q2'>out of every tribe, language, people, and nation, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_10">10&#160;</span>and made us kings and priests to our God; </div>
<div class='q2'>and we will reign on the earth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_11">11&#160;</span>I looked, and I heard something like a voice of many angels around the throne, the living creatures, and the elders. The number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands, and thousands of thousands, 
<span class="verse" id="RV5_12">12&#160;</span>saying with a loud voice, “Worthy is the Lamb who has been killed to receive the power, wealth, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_13">13&#160;</span>I heard every created thing which is in heaven, on the earth, under the earth, on the sea, and everything in them, saying, “To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be the blessing, the honor, the glory, and the dominion, forever and ever! Amen!”<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV5_14">14&#160;</span>The four living creatures said, “Amen!” Then the<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> elders fell down and worshiped.<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_1">1&#160;</span>I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, as with a voice of thunder, “Come and see!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_2">2&#160;</span>Then a white horse appeared, and he who sat on it had a bow. A crown was given to him, and he came out conquering, and to conquer. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_3">3&#160;</span>When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, “Come!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_4">4&#160;</span>Another came out, a red horse. To him who sat on it was given power to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another. There was given to him a great sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_5">5&#160;</span>When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, “Come and see!” And behold, a black horse, and he who sat on it had a balance in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_6">6&#160;</span>I heard a voice in the middle of the four living creatures saying, “A choenix<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of wheat for a denarius, and three choenix of barley for a denarius! Don’t damage the oil and the wine!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_7">7&#160;</span>When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, “Come and see!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_8">8&#160;</span>And behold, a pale horse, and the name of he who sat on it was Death. Hades<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> followed with him. Authority over one fourth of the earth, to kill with the sword, with famine, with death, and by the wild animals of the earth was given to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_9">9&#160;</span>When he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony of the Lamb which they had. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_10">10&#160;</span>They cried with a loud voice, saying, “How long, Master, the holy and true, until you judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?” 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_11">11&#160;</span>A long white robe was given to each of them. They were told that they should rest yet for a while, until their fellow servants and their brothers,<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> who would also be killed even as they were, should complete their course. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV6_12">12&#160;</span>I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake. The sun became black as sackcloth made of hair, and the whole moon became as blood. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_13">13&#160;</span>The stars of the sky fell to the earth, like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a great wind. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_14">14&#160;</span>The sky was removed like a scroll when it is rolled up. Every mountain and island was moved out of its place. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_15">15&#160;</span>The kings of the earth, the princes, the commanding officers, the rich, the strong, and every slave and free person, hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains. 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_16">16&#160;</span>They told the mountains and the rocks, “Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, 
<span class="verse" id="RV6_17">17&#160;</span>for the great day of his wrath has come, and who is able to stand?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_1">1&#160;</span>After this, I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, so that no wind would blow on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree. 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_2">2&#160;</span>I saw another angel ascend from the sunrise, having the seal of the living God. He cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea, 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_3">3&#160;</span>saying, “Don’t harm the earth, the sea, or the trees, until we have sealed the bondservants of our God on their foreheads!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_4">4&#160;</span>I heard the number of those who were sealed, one hundred forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_5">5&#160;</span>of the tribe of Judah twelve thousand were sealed, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_6">6&#160;</span>of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_7">7&#160;</span>of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_8">8&#160;</span>of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, and </div>
<div class='q'>of the tribe of Benjamin twelve thousand were sealed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_9">9&#160;</span>After these things I looked, and behold, a great multitude which no man could count, out of every nation and of all tribes, peoples, and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands. 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_10">10&#160;</span>They cried with a loud voice, saying, “Salvation be to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_11">11&#160;</span>All the angels were standing around the throne, the elders, and the four living creatures; and they fell on their faces before his throne, and worshiped God, 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_12">12&#160;</span>saying, “Amen! Blessing, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and might, be to our God forever and ever! Amen.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_13">13&#160;</span>One of the elders answered, saying to me, “These who are arrayed in the white robes, who are they, and where did they come from?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV7_14">14&#160;</span>I told him, “My lord, you know.” </div>
<div class='p'>He said to me, “These are those who came out of the great suffering.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>They washed their robes and made them white in the Lamb’s blood. 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple. He who sits on the throne will spread his tabernacle over them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_16">16&#160;</span>They will never be hungry or thirsty any more. The sun won’t beat on them, nor any heat; 
<span class="verse" id="RV7_17">17&#160;</span>for the Lamb who is in the middle of the throne shepherds them and leads them to springs of life-giving waters. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_1">1&#160;</span>When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour. 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_2">2&#160;</span>I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_3">3&#160;</span>Another angel came and stood over the altar, having a golden censer. Much incense was given to him, that he should add it to the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar which was before the throne. 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_4">4&#160;</span>The smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the angel’s hand. 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_5">5&#160;</span>The angel took the censer, and he filled it with the fire of the altar, then threw it on the earth. Thunders, sounds, lightnings, and an earthquake followed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_6">6&#160;</span>The seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_7">7&#160;</span>The first sounded, and there followed hail and fire, mixed with blood, and they were thrown to the earth. One third of the earth was burned up,<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and one third of the trees were burned up, and all green grass was burned up. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_8">8&#160;</span>The second angel sounded, and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea. One third of the sea became blood, 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_9">9&#160;</span>and one third of the living creatures which were in the sea died. One third of the ships were destroyed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_10">10&#160;</span>The third angel sounded, and a great star fell from the sky, burning like a torch, and it fell on one third of the rivers, and on the springs of water. 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_11">11&#160;</span>The name of the star is “Wormwood.” One third of the waters became wormwood. Many people died from the waters, because they were made bitter. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV8_12">12&#160;</span>The fourth angel sounded, and one third of the sun was struck, and one third of the moon, and one third of the stars, so that one third of them would be darkened; and the day wouldn’t shine for one third of it, and the night in the same way. 
<span class="verse" id="RV8_13">13&#160;</span>I saw, and I heard an eagle,<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> flying in mid heaven, saying with a loud voice, “Woe! Woe! Woe to those who dwell on the earth, because of the other blasts of the trumpets of the three angels, who are yet to sound!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_1">1&#160;</span>The fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star from the sky which had fallen to the earth. The key to the pit of the abyss was given to him. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_2">2&#160;</span>He opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke went up out of the pit, like the smoke from a<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> burning furnace. The sun and the air were darkened because of the smoke from the pit. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_3">3&#160;</span>Then out of the smoke came locusts on the earth, and power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have power. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_4">4&#160;</span>They were told that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those people who don’t have God’s seal on their foreheads. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_5">5&#160;</span>They were given power, not to kill them, but to torment them for five months. Their torment was like the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a person. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_6">6&#160;</span>In those days people will seek death, and will in no way find it. They will desire to die, and death will flee from them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_7">7&#160;</span>The shapes of the locusts were like horses prepared for war. On their heads were something like golden crowns, and their faces were like people’s faces. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_8">8&#160;</span>They had hair like women’s hair, and their teeth were like those of lions. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_9">9&#160;</span>They had breastplates like breastplates of iron. The sound of their wings was like the sound of many chariots and horses rushing to war. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_10">10&#160;</span>They have tails like those of scorpions, with stingers. In their tails they have power to harm men for five months. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_11">11&#160;</span>They have over them as king the angel of the abyss. His name in Hebrew is “Abaddon”,<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> but in Greek, he has the name “Apollyon”.<a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_12">12&#160;</span>The first woe is past. Behold, there are still two woes coming after this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_13">13&#160;</span>The sixth angel sounded. I heard a voice from the horns of the golden altar which is before God, 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_14">14&#160;</span>saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, “Free the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_15">15&#160;</span>The four angels were freed who had been prepared for that hour and day and month and year, so that they might kill one third of mankind. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_16">16&#160;</span>The number of the armies of the horsemen was two hundred million.<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> I heard the number of them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_17">17&#160;</span>Thus I saw the horses in the vision and those who sat on them, having breastplates of fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur yellow; and the horses’ heads resembled lions’ heads. Out of their mouths proceed fire, smoke, and sulfur. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_18">18&#160;</span>By these three plagues, one third of mankind was killed: by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur, which proceeded out of their mouths. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_19">19&#160;</span>For the power of the horses is in their mouths and in their tails. For their tails are like serpents, and have heads; and with them they harm. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV9_20">20&#160;</span>The rest of mankind, who were not killed with these plagues, didn’t repent of the works of their hands, that they wouldn’t worship demons, and the idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood, which can’t see, hear, or walk. 
<span class="verse" id="RV9_21">21&#160;</span>They didn’t repent of their murders, their sorceries,<a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> their sexual immorality, or their thefts.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV10_1">1&#160;</span>I saw a mighty angel coming down out of the sky, clothed with a cloud. A rainbow was on his head. His face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_2">2&#160;</span>He had in his hand a little open book. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land. 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_3">3&#160;</span>He cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars. When he cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices. 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_4">4&#160;</span>When the seven thunders sounded, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from the sky saying, “Seal up the things which the seven thunders said, and don’t write them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV10_5">5&#160;</span>The angel whom I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to the sky 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_6">6&#160;</span>and swore by him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and the things that are in it, the earth and the things that are in it, and the sea and the things that are in it, that there will no longer be delay, 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_7">7&#160;</span>but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound, then the mystery of God is finished, as he declared to his servants the prophets. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV10_8">8&#160;</span>The voice which I heard from heaven, again speaking with me, said, “Go, take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV10_9">9&#160;</span>I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little book. </div>
<div class='p'>He said to me, “Take it and eat it. It will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV10_10">10&#160;</span>I took the little book out of the angel’s hand, and ate it. It was as sweet as honey in my mouth. When I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter. 
<span class="verse" id="RV10_11">11&#160;</span>They<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> told me, “You must prophesy again over many peoples, nations, languages, and kings.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_1">1&#160;</span>A reed like a rod was given to me. Someone said, “Rise and measure God’s temple, and the altar, and those who worship in it. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_2">2&#160;</span>Leave out the court which is outside of the temple, and don’t measure it, for it has been given to the nations. They will tread the holy city under foot for forty-two months. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_3">3&#160;</span>I will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_4">4&#160;</span>These are the two olive trees and the two lamp stands, standing before the Lord of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_5">5&#160;</span>If anyone desires to harm them, fire proceeds out of their mouth and devours their enemies. If anyone desires to harm them, he must be killed in this way. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_6">6&#160;</span>These have the power to shut up the sky, that it may not rain during the days of their prophecy. They have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they desire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_7">7&#160;</span>When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up out of the abyss will make war with them, and overcome them, and kill them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_8">8&#160;</span>Their dead bodies will be in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_9">9&#160;</span>From among the peoples, tribes, languages, and nations, people will look at their dead bodies for three and a half days, and will not allow their dead bodies to be laid in a tomb. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_10">10&#160;</span>Those who dwell on the earth will rejoice over them, and they will be glad. They will give gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_11">11&#160;</span>After the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet. Great fear fell on those who saw them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_12">12&#160;</span>I heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, “Come up here!” They went up into heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_13">13&#160;</span>In that day there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell. Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified and gave glory to the God of heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_14">14&#160;</span>The second woe is past. Behold, the third woe comes quickly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_15">15&#160;</span>The seventh angel sounded, and great voices in heaven followed, saying, “The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ. He will reign forever and ever!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_16">16&#160;</span>The twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God’s throne, fell on their faces and worshiped God, 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_17">17&#160;</span>saying: “We give you thanks, Lord God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was,<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> because you have taken your great power and reigned. 
<span class="verse" id="RV11_18">18&#160;</span>The nations were angry, and your wrath came, as did the time for the dead to be judged, and to give your bondservants the prophets, their reward, as well as to the saints and those who fear your name, to the small and the great, and to destroy those who destroy the earth.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV11_19">19&#160;</span>God’s temple that is in heaven was opened, and the ark of the Lord’s covenant was seen in his temple. Lightnings, sounds, thunders, an earthquake, and great hail followed.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV12_1">1&#160;</span>A great sign was seen in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_2">2&#160;</span>She was with child. She cried out in pain, laboring to give birth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV12_3">3&#160;</span>Another sign was seen in heaven. Behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_4">4&#160;</span>His tail drew one third of the stars of the sky, and threw them to the earth. The dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_5">5&#160;</span>She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron. Her child was caught up to God and to his throne. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_6">6&#160;</span>The woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, that there they may nourish her one thousand two hundred sixty days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV12_7">7&#160;</span>There was war in the sky. Michael and his angels made war on the dragon. The dragon and his angels made war. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_8">8&#160;</span>They didn’t prevail. No place was found for them any more in heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_9">9&#160;</span>The great dragon was thrown down, the old serpent, he who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV12_10">10&#160;</span>I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, “Now the salvation, the power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ has come; for the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, who accuses them before our God day and night. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_11">11&#160;</span>They overcame him because of the Lamb’s blood, and because of the word of their testimony. They didn’t love their life, even to death. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore rejoice, heavens, and you who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and to the sea, because the devil has gone down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV12_13">13&#160;</span>When the dragon saw that he was thrown down to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_14">14&#160;</span>Two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, so that she might be nourished for a time, times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_15">15&#160;</span>The serpent spewed water out of his mouth after the woman like a river, that he might cause her to be carried away by the stream. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_16">16&#160;</span>The earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which the dragon spewed out of his mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="RV12_17">17&#160;</span>The dragon grew angry with the woman, and went away to make war with the rest of her offspring,<a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> who keep God’s commandments and hold Jesus’ testimony.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV13_1">1&#160;</span>Then I stood on the sand of the sea. I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads. On his horns were ten crowns, and on his heads, blasphemous names. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_2">2&#160;</span>The beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were like those of a bear, and his mouth like the mouth of a lion. The dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authority. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_3">3&#160;</span>One of his heads looked like it had been wounded fatally. His fatal wound was healed, and the whole earth marveled at the beast. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_4">4&#160;</span>They worshiped the dragon because he gave his authority to the beast; and they worshiped the beast, saying, “Who is like the beast? Who is able to make war with him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV13_5">5&#160;</span>A mouth speaking great things and blasphemy was given to him. Authority to make war for forty-two months was given to him. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_6">6&#160;</span>He opened his mouth for blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, his dwelling, and those who dwell in heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_7">7&#160;</span>It was given to him to make war with the saints and to overcome them. Authority over every tribe, people, language, and nation was given to him. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_8">8&#160;</span>All who dwell on the earth will worship him, everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who has been killed. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_9">9&#160;</span>If anyone has an ear, let him hear. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_10">10&#160;</span>If anyone is to go into captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone is to be killed with the sword, he must be killed.<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV13_11">11&#160;</span>I saw another beast coming up out of the earth. He had two horns like a lamb and it spoke like a dragon. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_12">12&#160;</span>He exercises all the authority of the first beast in his presence. He makes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose fatal wound was healed. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_13">13&#160;</span>He performs great signs, even making fire come down out of the sky to the earth in the sight of people. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_14">14&#160;</span>He deceives my own<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> people who dwell on the earth because of the signs he was granted to do in front of the beast, saying to those who dwell on the earth that they should make an image to the beast who had the sword wound and lived. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_15">15&#160;</span>It was given to him to give breath to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause as many as wouldn’t worship the image of the beast to be killed. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_16">16&#160;</span>He causes all, the small and the great, the rich and the poor, and the free and the slave, to be given marks on their right hands or on their foreheads; 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_17">17&#160;</span>and that no one would be able to buy or to sell unless he has that mark, which is the name of the beast or the number of his name. 
<span class="verse" id="RV13_18">18&#160;</span>Here is wisdom. He who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man. His number is six hundred sixty-six.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_1">1&#160;</span>I saw, and behold, the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him a number, one hundred forty-four thousand, having his name and the name of his Father written on their foreheads. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_2">2&#160;</span>I heard a sound from heaven like the sound of many waters and like the sound of a great thunder. The sound which I heard was like that of harpists playing on their harps. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_3">3&#160;</span>They sing a new song before the throne and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand, those who had been redeemed out of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_4">4&#160;</span>These are those who were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were redeemed by Jesus from among men, the first fruits to God and to the Lamb. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_5">5&#160;</span>In their mouth was found no lie, for they are blameless.<a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_6">6&#160;</span>I saw an angel flying in mid heaven, having an eternal Good News to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth—to every nation, tribe, language, and people. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_7">7&#160;</span>He said with a loud voice, “Fear the Lord, and give him glory, for the hour of his judgment has come. Worship him who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and the springs of waters!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_8">8&#160;</span>Another, a second angel, followed, saying, “Babylon the great has fallen, which has made all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_9">9&#160;</span>Another angel, a third, followed them, saying with a great voice, “If anyone worships the beast and his image, and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand, 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_10">10&#160;</span>he also will drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is prepared unmixed in the cup of his anger. He will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_11">11&#160;</span>The smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever. They have no rest day and night, those who worship the beast and his image, and whoever receives the mark of his name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_12">12&#160;</span>Here is the perseverance of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_13">13&#160;</span>I heard a voice from heaven saying, “Write, ‘Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>“Yes,” says the Spirit, “that they may rest from their labors, for their works follow with them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_14">14&#160;</span>I looked, and saw a white cloud, and on the cloud one sitting like a son of man,<a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_15">15&#160;</span>Another angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, “Send your sickle and reap, for the hour to reap has come; for the harvest of the earth is ripe!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_16">16&#160;</span>He who sat on the cloud thrust his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV14_17">17&#160;</span>Another angel came out of the temple which is in heaven. He also had a sharp sickle. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_18">18&#160;</span>Another angel came out from the altar, he who has power over fire, and he called with a great voice to him who had the sharp sickle, saying, “Send your sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for the earth’s grapes are fully ripe!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_19">19&#160;</span>The angel thrust his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vintage of the earth and threw it into the great wine press of the wrath of God. 
<span class="verse" id="RV14_20">20&#160;</span>The wine press was trodden outside of the city, and blood came out of the wine press, up to the bridles of the horses, as far as one thousand six hundred stadia.<a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV15_1">1&#160;</span>I saw another great and marvelous sign in the sky: seven angels having the seven last plagues, for in them God’s wrath is finished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV15_2">2&#160;</span>I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who overcame the beast, his image,<a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and the number of his name, standing on the sea of glass, having harps of God. 
<span class="verse" id="RV15_3">3&#160;</span>They sang the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“Great and marvelous are your works, Lord God, the Almighty! </div>
<div class='q2'>Righteous and true are your ways, you King of the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="RV15_4">4&#160;</span>Who wouldn’t fear you, Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and glorify your name? </div>
<div class='q'>For you only are holy. </div>
<div class='q2'>For all the nations will come and worship before you. </div>
<div class='q2'>For your righteous acts have been revealed.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV15_5">5&#160;</span>After these things I looked, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened. 
<span class="verse" id="RV15_6">6&#160;</span>The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out, clothed with pure, bright linen, and wearing golden sashes around their chests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV15_7">7&#160;</span>One of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever. 
<span class="verse" id="RV15_8">8&#160;</span>The temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God and from his power. No one was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven angels would be finished.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_1">1&#160;</span>I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, “Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_2">2&#160;</span>The first went, and poured out his bowl into the earth, and it became a harmful and painful sore on the people who had the mark of the beast, and who worshiped his image. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_3">3&#160;</span>The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood as of a dead man. Every living thing in the sea died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_4">4&#160;</span>The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_5">5&#160;</span>I heard the angel of the waters saying, “You are righteous, who are and who were, O Holy One, because you have judged these things. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_6">6&#160;</span>For they poured out the blood of saints and prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They deserve this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_7">7&#160;</span>I heard the altar saying, “Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_8">8&#160;</span>The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given to him to scorch men with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_9">9&#160;</span>People were scorched with great heat, and people blasphemed the name of God who has the power over these plagues. They didn’t repent and give him glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_10">10&#160;</span>The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and his kingdom was darkened. They gnawed their tongues because of the pain, 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_11">11&#160;</span>and they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores. They still didn’t repent of their works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_12">12&#160;</span>The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river, the Euphrates. Its water was dried up, that the way might be prepared for the kings that come from the sunrise.<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_13">13&#160;</span>I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, something like frogs; 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_14">14&#160;</span>for they are spirits of demons, performing signs, which go out to the kings of the whole inhabited earth, to gather them together for the war of that great day of God the Almighty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, I come like a thief. Blessed is he who watches, and keeps his clothes, so that he doesn’t walk naked, and they see his shame.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_16">16&#160;</span>He gathered them together into the place which is called in Hebrew, “Harmagedon”. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV16_17">17&#160;</span>The seventh poured out his bowl into the air. A loud voice came out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, “It is done!” 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_18">18&#160;</span>There were lightnings, sounds, and thunders; and there was a great earthquake such as has not happened since there were men on the earth—so great an earthquake and so mighty. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_19">19&#160;</span>The great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. Babylon the great was remembered in the sight of God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_20">20&#160;</span>Every island fled away, and the mountains were not found. 
<span class="verse" id="RV16_21">21&#160;</span>Great hailstones, about the weight of a talent,<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> came down out of the sky on people. People blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for this plague was exceedingly severe.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV17_1">1&#160;</span>One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, “Come here. I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters, 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_2">2&#160;</span>with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality. Those who dwell in the earth were made drunken with the wine of her sexual immorality.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_3">3&#160;</span>He carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness. I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored beast, full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_4">4&#160;</span>The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of the sexual immorality of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_5">5&#160;</span>And on her forehead a name was written, “MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE PROSTITUTES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_6">6&#160;</span>I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. When I saw her, I wondered with great amazement. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV17_7">7&#160;</span>The angel said to me, “Why do you wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_8">8&#160;</span>The beast that you saw was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the abyss and to go into destruction. Those who dwell on the earth and whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see that the beast was, and is not, and shall be present.<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV17_9">9&#160;</span>Here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains on which the woman sits. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_10">10&#160;</span>They are seven kings. Five have fallen, the one is, and the other has not yet come. When he comes, he must continue a little while. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_11">11&#160;</span>The beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, and is of the seven; and he goes to destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_12">12&#160;</span>The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have received no kingdom as yet, but they receive authority as kings with the beast for one hour. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_13">13&#160;</span>These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_14">14&#160;</span>These will war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, for he is Lord of lords and King of kings; and those who are with him are called, chosen, and faithful.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_15">15&#160;</span>He said to me, “The waters which you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_16">16&#160;</span>The ten horns which you saw, they and the beast will hate the prostitute, will make her desolate, will strip her naked, will eat her flesh, and will burn her utterly with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_17">17&#160;</span>For God has put in their hearts to do what he has in mind, to be of one mind, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God should be accomplished. 
<span class="verse" id="RV17_18">18&#160;</span>The woman whom you saw is the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV18_1">1&#160;</span>After these things, I saw another angel coming down out of the sky, having great authority. The earth was illuminated with his glory. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_2">2&#160;</span>He cried with a mighty voice, saying, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and she has become a habitation of demons, a prison of every unclean spirit, and a prison of every unclean and hated bird! 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_3">3&#160;</span>For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality, the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth grew rich from the abundance of her luxury.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV18_4">4&#160;</span>I heard another voice from heaven, saying, “Come out of her, my people, that you have no participation in her sins, and that you don’t receive of her plagues, 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_5">5&#160;</span>for her sins have reached to the sky, and God has remembered her iniquities. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_6">6&#160;</span>Return to her just as she returned, and repay her double as she did, and according to her works. In the cup which she mixed, mix to her double. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_7">7&#160;</span>However much she glorified herself and grew wanton, so much give her of torment and mourning. For she says in her heart, ‘I sit a queen, and am no widow, and will in no way see mourning.’ 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore in one day her plagues will come: death, mourning, and famine; and she will be utterly burned with fire, for the Lord God who has judged her is strong. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV18_9">9&#160;</span>The kings of the earth who committed sexual immorality and lived wantonly with her will weep and wail over her, when they look at the smoke of her burning, 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_10">10&#160;</span>standing far away for the fear of her torment, saying, ‘Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon, the strong city! For your judgment has come in one hour.’ 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_11">11&#160;</span>The merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, for no one buys their merchandise any more: 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_12">12&#160;</span>merchandise of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, silk, scarlet, all expensive wood, every vessel of ivory, every vessel made of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble; 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_13">13&#160;</span>and cinnamon, incense, perfume, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, sheep, horses, chariots, and people’s bodies and souls. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_14">14&#160;</span>The fruits which your soul lusted after have been lost to you. All things that were dainty and sumptuous have perished from you, and you will find them no more at all. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_15">15&#160;</span>The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, will stand far away for the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning, 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_16">16&#160;</span>saying, ‘Woe, woe, the great city, she who was dressed in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls! 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_17">17&#160;</span>For in an hour such great riches are made desolate.’ Every ship master, and everyone who sails anywhere, and mariners, and as many as gain their living by sea, stood far away, 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_18">18&#160;</span>and cried out as they looked at the smoke of her burning, saying, ‘What is like the great city?’ 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_19">19&#160;</span>They cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and mourning, saying, ‘Woe, woe, the great city, in which all who had their ships in the sea were made rich by reason of her great wealth!’ For she is made desolate in one hour. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV18_20">20&#160;</span>“Rejoice over her, O heaven, you saints, apostles, and prophets, for God has judged your judgment on her.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV18_21">21&#160;</span>A mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, “Thus with violence will Babylon, the great city, be thrown down, and will be found no more at all. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_22">22&#160;</span>The voice of harpists, minstrels, flute players, and trumpeters will be heard no more at all in you. No craftsman of whatever craft will be found any more at all in you. The sound of a mill will be heard no more at all in you. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_23">23&#160;</span>The light of a lamp will shine no more at all in you. The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride will be heard no more at all in you, for your merchants were the princes of the earth; for with your sorcery all the nations were deceived. 
<span class="verse" id="RV18_24">24&#160;</span>In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been slain on the earth.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_1">1&#160;</span>After these things I heard something like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, “Hallelujah! Salvation, power, and glory belong to our God; 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_2">2&#160;</span>for his judgments are true and righteous. For he has judged the great prostitute who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and he has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_3">3&#160;</span>A second said, “Hallelujah! Her smoke goes up forever and ever.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_4">4&#160;</span>The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying, “Amen! Hallelujah!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_5">5&#160;</span>A voice came from the throne, saying, “Give praise to our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, the small and the great!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_6">6&#160;</span>I heard something like the voice of a great multitude, and like the voice of many waters, and like the voice of mighty thunders, saying, “Hallelujah! For the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns! 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_7">7&#160;</span>Let’s rejoice and be exceedingly glad, and let’s give the glory to him. For the wedding of the Lamb has come, and his wife has made herself ready.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_8">8&#160;</span>It was given to her that she would array herself in bright, pure, fine linen, for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_9">9&#160;</span>He said to me, “Write, ‘Blessed are those who are invited to the wedding supper of the Lamb.’ ” He said to me, “These are true words of God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_10">10&#160;</span>I fell down before his feet to worship him. He said to me, “Look! Don’t do it! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers who hold the testimony of Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_11">11&#160;</span>I saw the heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it is called Faithful and True. In righteousness he judges and makes war. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_12">12&#160;</span>His eyes are a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns. He has names written and a name written which no one knows but he himself. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_13">13&#160;</span>He is clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood. His name is called “The Word of God.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_14">14&#160;</span>The armies which are in heaven, clothed in white, pure, fine linen, followed him on white horses. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_15">15&#160;</span>Out of his mouth proceeds a sharp, double-edged sword that with it he should strike the nations. He will rule them with an iron rod.<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> He treads the wine press of the fierceness of the wrath of God, the Almighty. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_16">16&#160;</span>He has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, “KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV19_17">17&#160;</span>I saw an angel standing in the sun. He cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the sky, “Come! Be gathered together to the great supper of God,<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_18">18&#160;</span>that you may eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and slave, small and great.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_19">19&#160;</span>I saw the beast, the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him who sat on the horse and against his army. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_20">20&#160;</span>The beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who worked the signs in his sight, with which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image. These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur. 
<span class="verse" id="RV19_21">21&#160;</span>The rest were killed with the sword of him who sat on the horse, the sword which came out of his mouth. So all the birds were filled with their flesh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV20_1">1&#160;</span>I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_2">2&#160;</span>He seized the dragon, the old serpent, who is the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole inhabited earth,<a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and bound him for a thousand years, 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_3">3&#160;</span>and cast him into the abyss, and shut it and sealed it over him, that he should deceive the nations no more until the thousand years were finished. After this, he must be freed for a short time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV20_4">4&#160;</span>I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given to them. I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus and for the word of God, and such as didn’t worship the beast nor his image, and didn’t receive the mark on their forehead and on their hand. They lived and reigned with Christ for a thousand years. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_5">5&#160;</span>The rest of the dead didn’t live until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_6">6&#160;</span>Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. Over these, the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with him one thousand years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV20_7">7&#160;</span>And after the thousand years, Satan will be released from his prison 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_8">8&#160;</span>and he will come out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the war, whose number is as the sand of the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_9">9&#160;</span>They went up over the width of the earth and surrounded the camp of the saints and the beloved city. Fire came down out of heaven from God and devoured them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_10">10&#160;</span>The devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet are also. They will be tormented day and night forever and ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV20_11">11&#160;</span>I saw a great white throne and him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. There was found no place for them. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_12">12&#160;</span>I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and they opened books. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged out of the things which were written in the books, according to their works. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_13">13&#160;</span>The sea gave up the dead who were in it. Death and Hades<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> gave up the dead who were in them. They were judged, each one according to his works. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_14">14&#160;</span>Death and Hades<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="RV20_15">15&#160;</span>If anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV21_1">1&#160;</span>I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away, and the sea is no more. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_2">2&#160;</span>I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_3">3&#160;</span>I heard a loud voice out of heaven saying, “Behold, God’s dwelling is with people; and he will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_4">4&#160;</span>He will wipe away every tear from their eyes. Death will be no more; neither will there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain any more. The first things have passed away.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV21_5">5&#160;</span>He who sits on the throne said, <span class='wj'>“Behold, I am making all things new.”</span> He said, <span class='wj'>“Write, for these words of God are faithful and true.” </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_6">6&#160;</span>He said to me, <span class='wj'>“I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give freely to him who is thirsty from the spring of the water of life. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>He who overcomes, I will give him these things. I will be his God, and he will be my son. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_8">8&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>But for the cowardly, unbelieving, sinners,</span><a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <span class='wj'>abominable, murderers, sexually immoral, sorcerers,</span><a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>idolaters, and all liars, their part is in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV21_9">9&#160;</span>One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls which were loaded with the seven last plagues came, and he spoke with me, saying, “Come here. I will show you the bride, the Lamb’s wife.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_10">10&#160;</span>He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_11">11&#160;</span>having the glory of God. Her light was like a most precious stone, like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_12">12&#160;</span>having a great and high wall with twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written on them, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_13">13&#160;</span>On the east were three gates, and on the north three gates, and on the south three gates, and on the west three gates. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_14">14&#160;</span>The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV21_15">15&#160;</span>He who spoke with me had for a measure a golden reed to measure the city, its gates, and its walls. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_16">16&#160;</span>The city is square. Its length is as great as its width. He measured the city with the reed: twelve thousand twelve stadia.<a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Its length, width, and height are equal. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_17">17&#160;</span>Its wall is one hundred forty-four cubits,<a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> by the measure of a man, that is, of an angel. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_18">18&#160;</span>The construction of its wall was jasper. The city was pure gold, like pure glass. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_19">19&#160;</span>The foundations of the city’s wall were adorned with all kinds of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper, the second sapphire;<a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the third chalcedony, the fourth emerald, 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_20">20&#160;</span>the fifth sardonyx, the sixth sardius, the seventh chrysolite, the eighth beryl, the ninth topaz, the tenth chrysoprase, the eleventh jacinth, and the twelfth amethyst. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_21">21&#160;</span>The twelve gates were twelve pearls. Each one of the gates was made of one pearl. The street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV21_22">22&#160;</span>I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God the Almighty and the Lamb are its temple. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_23">23&#160;</span>The city has no need for the sun or moon to shine, for the very glory of God illuminated it and its lamp is the Lamb. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_24">24&#160;</span>The nations will walk in its light. The kings of the earth bring the glory and honor of the nations into it. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_25">25&#160;</span>Its gates will in no way be shut by day (for there will be no night there), 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_26">26&#160;</span>and they shall bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it so that they may enter. 
<span class="verse" id="RV21_27">27&#160;</span>There will in no way enter into it anything profane, or one who causes an abomination or a lie, but only those who are written in the Lamb’s book of life.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='RV22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_1">1&#160;</span>He showed me a<a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_2">2&#160;</span>in the middle of its street. On this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruits, yielding its fruit every month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_3">3&#160;</span>There will be no curse any more. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will serve him. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_4">4&#160;</span>They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_5">5&#160;</span>There will be no night, and they need no lamp light or sun light; for the Lord God will illuminate them. They will reign forever and ever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_6">6&#160;</span>He said to me, “These words are faithful and true. The Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show to his bondservants the things which must happen soon.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_7">7&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, I am coming soon! Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_8">8&#160;</span>Now I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. When I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who had shown me these things. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_9">9&#160;</span>He said to me, “You must not do that! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers, the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God.” 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_10">10&#160;</span>He said to me, “Don’t seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_11">11&#160;</span>He who acts unjustly, let him act unjustly still. He who is filthy, let him be filthy still. He who is righteous, let him do righteousness still. He who is holy, let him be holy still.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_12">12&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>“Behold, I am coming soon! My reward is with me, to repay to each man according to his work. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_13">13&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_14">14&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Blessed are those who do his commandments,</span><a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> <span class='wj'>that they may have the right to the tree of life, and may enter in by the gates into the city. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_15">15&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>Outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood. </span> 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_16">16&#160;</span> <span class='wj'>I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the assemblies. I am the root and the offspring of David, the Bright and Morning Star.”</span> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_17">17&#160;</span>The Spirit and the bride say, “Come!” He who hears, let him say, “Come!” He who is thirsty, let him come. He who desires, let him take the water of life freely. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_18">18&#160;</span>I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues which are written in this book. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_19">19&#160;</span>If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree<a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of life, and out of the holy city, which are written in this book. 
<span class="verse" id="RV22_20">20&#160;</span>He who testifies these things says, <span class='wj'>“Yes, I am coming soon.” </span> </div>
<div class='p'>Amen! Yes, come, Lord Jesus! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="RV22_21">21&#160;</span>The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints. Amen. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Christ” means “Anointed One”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">or, messenger (here and wherever angel is mentioned)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_6"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX19_6'>Exodus 19:6</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_6'>Isaiah 61:6</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_7"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:7</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “ἰδοὺ”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_8"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “the Beginning and the End”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “God”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “which are in Asia”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_13"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 1:13</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_13'>Daniel 7:13</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_18"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:18</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV1_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:20</a>
 <span class="ft">or, messengers (here and wherever angels are mentioned)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV2_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:3</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “have labored and”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV2_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:15</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “which I hate” instead of “likewise”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV2_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2:17</a>
 <span class="ft">Manna is supernatural food, named after the Hebrew for “What is it?”. See <a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX11_7'>Exodus 11:7-9</a>.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV2_20"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2:20</a>
 <span class="ft">TR, NU read “that” instead of “your”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV2_27"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 2:27</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_9'>Psalm 2:9</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV3_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:2</a>
 <span class="ft">NU &amp; TR read “which were about to die” instead of “which you were about to throw away”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV3_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:14</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Source, or Head</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV4_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Hodges/Farstad MT reads “holy” 9 times instead of 3.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV4_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “and God, the Holy One,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV5_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:13</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “Amen!”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV5_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:14</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “twenty-four”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV5_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:14</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “the one living forever and ever”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV6_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:6</a>
 <span class="ft">A choenix is a dry volume measure that is a little more than a liter (a little more than a quart).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV6_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 6:8</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV6_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 6:11</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “brothers” here and where context allows may also be correctly translated “brothers and sisters” or “siblings.”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:14</a>
 <span class="ft">or, oppression</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV8_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:7</a>
 <span class="ft">TR omits “One third of the earth was burned up”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV8_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8:13</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “angel” instead of “eagle” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV9_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:2</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “great”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV9_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:11</a>
 <span class="ft">“Abaddon” is a Hebrew word that means “ruin”, “destruction”, or “the place of destruction”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV9_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:11</a>
 <span class="ft">“Apollyon” means “Destroyer”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV9_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 9:16</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, “ten thousands of ten thousands”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV9_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:21</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “sorceries” (pharmakeia) also implies the use of potions, poisons, and drugs</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV10_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:11</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “He” instead of “They”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV11_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:17</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “and who is coming”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV12_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:17</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV13_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:10</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “If anyone leads into captivity, into captivity he goes. If anyone will kill with the sword, he must be killed with a sword.” instead of “If anyone is to go into captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone is to be killed with the sword, he must be killed.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV13_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:14</a>
 <span class="ft">NU omits “my own”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV14_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:5</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “before the throne of God”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV14_14"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 14:14</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='DAN.xhtml#DN7_13'>Daniel 7:13</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV14_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:20</a>
 <span class="ft">1600 stadia = 296 kilometers or 184 miles</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV15_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:2</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “his mark,”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV16_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:12</a>
 <span class="ft">or, east</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV16_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:21</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV17_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “yet is” instead of “shall be present”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV19_15"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 19:15</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS2_9'>Psalm 2:9</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV19_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:17</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “supper of the great God” instead of “great supper of God”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV20_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:2</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU omit “who deceives the whole inhabited earth”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV20_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV20_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20:14</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Hell</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV21_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:8</a>
 <span class="ft">TR and NU omit “sinners”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV21_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21:8</a>
 <span class="ft">The word for “sorcerers” here also includes users of potions and drugs.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV21_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 21:16</a>
 <span class="ft">12,012 stadia = or 2,221 kilometers or 1,380 miles. TR reads 12,000 stadia instead of 12,012 stadia.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV21_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 21:17</a>
 <span class="ft">144 cubits is about 65.8 meters or 216 feet</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV21_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:19</a>
 <span class="ft">or, lapis lazuli</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV22_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22:1</a>
 <span class="ft">TR adds “pure”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV22_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22:14</a>
 <span class="ft">NU reads “wash their robes” instead of “do his commandments”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#RV22_19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 22:19</a>
 <span class="ft">TR reads “Book” instead of “tree”</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
