<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Sirach 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Sirach</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='SIR.xhtml#SR51_0'>51</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='SR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE WISDOM OF JESUS THE SON OF SIRACH, </div>
<div class='mt2'>OR </div>
<div class='mt'>ECCLESIASTICUS </div>
<div class='ip'><span class='bk'>The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach</span>, also called <span class='bk'>Ecclesiasticus</span>, is recognized as Deuterocanonical Scripture by the Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Russian Orthodox Churches. </div>
<div class='is'>The Prologue of the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach. </div>
<div class='ip'>WHEREAS many and great things have been delivered to us by the law and the prophets, and by the others that have followed in their steps, for which we must give Israel the praise for instruction and wisdom; and since not only the readers need to become skillful themselves, but also those who love learning must be able to profit those who are outside, both by speaking and writing; my grandfather Jesus, having much given himself to the reading of the law, and the prophets, and the other books of our fathers, and having gained great familiarity with them, was also drawn on himself to write somewhat pertaining to instruction and wisdom, in order that those who love learning, and are devoted to these things, might make progress much more by living according to the law. You are entreated therefore to read with favor and attention, and to pardon us, if in any parts of what we have labored to interpret, we may seem to fail in some of the phrases. For things originally spoken in Hebrew don’t have the same force in them when they are translated into another language. Not only these, but the law itself, and the prophecies, and the rest of the books, have no small difference, when they are spoken in their original language. For having come into Egypt in the thirty-eighth year of Energetes the king, and having continued there some time, I found a copy giving no small instruction. I thought it therefore most necessary for me to apply some diligence and travail to translate this book, applying indeed much watchfulness and skill in that space of time to bring the book to an end and publish for them also, who in the land of their travels are desiring to learn, preparing their character in advance, so as to live according to the law.  </div>
<div class='b' id='SR1_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 1</div>
<div class='q'>

<span class="verse" id="SR1_1">1&#160;</span>All wisdom comes from the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is with him forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_2">2&#160;</span>Who can count the sand of the seas, </div>
<div class='q2'>the drops of rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the days of eternity? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_3">3&#160;</span>Who will search out the height of the sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>the breadth of the earth, the deep, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wisdom? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_4">4&#160;</span>Wisdom has been created before all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the understanding of prudence from everlasting. 
<span class="verse" id="SR1_5">5&#160;</span> <a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_6">6&#160;</span>To whom has the root of wisdom been revealed? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has known her shrewd counsels? 
<span class="verse" id="SR1_7">7&#160;</span> <a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_8">8&#160;</span>There is one wise, greatly to be feared, </div>
<div class='q2'>sitting upon his throne: the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_9">9&#160;</span>He created her. </div>
<div class='q2'>He saw and measured her. </div>
<div class='q2'>He poured her out upon all his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_10">10&#160;</span>She is with all flesh according to his gift. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gave her freely to those who love him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_11">11&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is glory, exultation, </div>
<div class='q2'>gladness, and a crown of rejoicing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_12">12&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord will delight the heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will give gladness, joy, and length of days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_13">13&#160;</span>Whoever fears the Lord, it will go well with him at the last. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be blessed in the day of his death. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_14">14&#160;</span>To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>It was created together with the faithful in the womb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_15">15&#160;</span>She<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> laid an eternal foundation with men. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will be trusted among their offspring. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_16">16&#160;</span>To fear the Lord is the fullness of wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>She inebriates men with her fruits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_17">17&#160;</span>She will fill all her house with desirable things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her storehouses with her produce. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_18">18&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is the crown of wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>making peace and<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> perfect health to flourish.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_19">19&#160;</span>He both saw and measured her. </div>
<div class='q2'>He rained down skill and knowledge of understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>and exalted the honor of those who hold her fast. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_20">20&#160;</span>To fear the Lord is the root of wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her branches are length of days. 
<span class="verse" id="SR1_21">21&#160;</span> <a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_22">22&#160;</span>Unjust wrath can never be justified, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his wrath tips the scale to his downfall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_23">23&#160;</span>A man that is patient will resist for a season, </div>
<div class='q2'>and afterward gladness will spring up to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_24">24&#160;</span>He will hide his words until the right moment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the lips of many will tell of his understanding. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_25">25&#160;</span>A wise saying is in the treasures of wisdom; </div>
<div class='q2'>but godliness is an abomination to a sinner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_26">26&#160;</span>If you desire wisdom, keep the commandments </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Lord will give her to you freely; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_27">27&#160;</span>for the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>Faith and humility are his good pleasure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_28">28&#160;</span>Don’t disobey the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t come to him with a double heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t be a hypocrite in men’s sight. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep watch over your lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR1_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t exalt yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you fall and bring dishonor upon your soul. </div>
<div class='q'>The Lord will reveal your secrets </div>
<div class='q2'>and will cast you down in the midst of the congregation, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you didn’t come to the fear of the Lord </div>
<div class='q2'>and your heart was full of deceit. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_1">1&#160;</span>My son, if you come to serve the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>prepare your soul for temptation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_2">2&#160;</span>Set your heart aright, constantly endure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t make haste in time of calamity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_3">3&#160;</span>Cling to him, and don’t depart, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be increased at your latter end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_4">4&#160;</span>Accept whatever is brought upon you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be patient when you suffer humiliation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_5">5&#160;</span>For gold is tried in the fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>and acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_6">6&#160;</span>Put your trust in him, and he will help you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Make your ways straight, and set your hope on him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_7">7&#160;</span>All you who fear the Lord, wait for his mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t turn aside, lest you fall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_8">8&#160;</span>All you who fear the Lord, put your trust in him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your reward will not fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_9">9&#160;</span>All you who fear the Lord, hope for good things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for eternal gladness and mercy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_10">10&#160;</span>Look at the generations of old, and see: </div>
<div class='q2'>Who ever put his trust in the Lord, and was ashamed? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who remained in his fear, and was forsaken? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who called upon him, and he neglected him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_11">11&#160;</span>For the Lord is full of compassion and mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>He forgives sins and saves in time of affliction. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_12">12&#160;</span>Woe to fearful hearts, to faint hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the sinner who goes two ways! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_13">13&#160;</span>Woe to the faint heart! For it doesn’t believe. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore it won’t be defended. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_14">14&#160;</span>Woe to you who have lost your patience! </div>
<div class='q2'>And what will you all do when the Lord visits you? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_15">15&#160;</span>Those who fear the Lord will not disobey his words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who love him will keep his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_16">16&#160;</span>Those who fear the Lord will seek his good pleasure. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who love him will be filled with the law. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_17">17&#160;</span>Those who fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will humble their souls in his sight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR2_18">18&#160;</span>We will fall into the hands of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not into the hands of men; </div>
<div class='q'>for as his majesty is, </div>
<div class='q2'>so also is his mercy. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_1">1&#160;</span>Hear me, your father, O my children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and do what you hear, that you all may be safe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_2">2&#160;</span>For the Lord honors the father over the children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has confirmed the judgment of the mother over her sons. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_3">3&#160;</span>He who honors his father will make atonement for sins. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_4">4&#160;</span>He who gives glory to his mother is as one who lays up treasure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_5">5&#160;</span>Whoever honors his father will have joy in his own children. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be heard in the day of his prayer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_6">6&#160;</span>He who gives glory to his father will have length of days. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who listens to the Lord will bring rest to his mother, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_7">7&#160;</span> <a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and will serve under his parents, as to masters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_8">8&#160;</span>Honor your father in deed and word, </div>
<div class='q2'>that a blessing may come upon you from him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_9">9&#160;</span>For the blessing of the father establishes the houses of children, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the curse of the mother roots out the foundations. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t glorify yourself in the dishonor of your father, </div>
<div class='q2'>for your father’s dishonor is no glory to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_11">11&#160;</span>For the glory of a man is from the honor of his father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a mother in dishonor is a reproach to her children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_12">12&#160;</span>My son, help your father in his old age, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t grieve him as long as he lives. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_13">13&#160;</span>If he fails in understanding, have patience with him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t dishonor him in your full strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_14">14&#160;</span>For the kindness to your father will not be forgotten. </div>
<div class='q2'>Instead of sins it will be added to build you up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_15">15&#160;</span>In the day of your affliction it will be remembered for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>as fair weather upon ice, </div>
<div class='q2'>so your sins will also melt away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_16">16&#160;</span>He who forsakes his father is as a blasphemer. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who provokes his mother is cursed by the Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_17">17&#160;</span>My son, go on with your business in humility; </div>
<div class='q2'>so you will be loved by an acceptable man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_18">18&#160;</span>The greater you are, humble yourself the more, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will find favor before the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="SR3_19">19&#160;</span> <a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_20">20&#160;</span>For the power of the Lord is great, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he is glorified by those who are lowly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t seek things that are too hard for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t search out things that are above your strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_22">22&#160;</span>Think about the things that have been commanded you, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have no need of the things that are secret. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_23">23&#160;</span>Don’t be overly busy in tasks that are beyond you, </div>
<div class='q2'>for more things are shown to you than men can understand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_24">24&#160;</span>For the conceit of many has led them astray. </div>
<div class='q2'>Evil opinion has caused their judgment to slip. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_25">25&#160;</span> <a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a>There is no light without eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no wisdom without knowledge. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_26">26&#160;</span>A stubborn heart will do badly at the end. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who loves danger will perish in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_27">27&#160;</span>A stubborn heart will be burdened with troubles. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sinner will heap sin upon sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_28">28&#160;</span>The calamity of the proud has no healing, </div>
<div class='q2'>for a weed of wickedness has taken root in him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_29">29&#160;</span>The heart of the prudent will understand a proverb. </div>
<div class='q2'>A wise man desires the ear of a listener. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_30">30&#160;</span>Water will quench a flaming fire; </div>
<div class='q2'>almsgiving will make atonement for sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR3_31">31&#160;</span>He who repays good turns is mindful of that which comes afterward. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the time of his falling he will find a support. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_1">1&#160;</span>My son, don’t deprive the poor of his living. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t make the needy eyes wait long. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t make a hungry soul sorrowful, </div>
<div class='q2'>or provoke a man in his distress. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t add more trouble to a heart that is provoked. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t put off giving to him who is in need. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t reject a suppliant in his affliction. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t turn your face away from a poor man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t turn your eye away from one who asks. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give no occasion to a man to curse you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_6">6&#160;</span>For if he curses you in the bitterness of his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who made him will hear his supplication. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_7">7&#160;</span>Endear yourself to the assembly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bow your head to a great man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_8">8&#160;</span>Incline your ear to a poor man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Answer him with peaceful words in humility. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_9">9&#160;</span>Deliver him who is wronged from the hand of him who wrongs him; </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be hesitant in giving judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_10">10&#160;</span>Be as a father to the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a husband to their mother. </div>
<div class='q'>So you will be as a son of the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will love you more than your mother does. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_11">11&#160;</span>Wisdom exalts her sons, </div>
<div class='q2'>and takes hold of those who seek her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_12">12&#160;</span>He who loves her loves life. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who seek her early will be filled with gladness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_13">13&#160;</span>He who holds her fast will inherit glory. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> he enters, the Lord will bless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_14">14&#160;</span>Those who serve her minister to the Holy One. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord loves those who love her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_15">15&#160;</span>He who listens to her will judge the nations. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who heeds her will dwell securely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_16">16&#160;</span>If he trusts her, he will inherit her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his generations will possess her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_17">17&#160;</span>For at the first she will walk with him in crooked ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will bring fear and dread upon him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and torment him with her discipline, </div>
<div class='q2'>until she may trust his soul, and try him by her judgments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_18">18&#160;</span>Then she will return him again to the straight way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will gladden him, and reveal to him her secrets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_19">19&#160;</span>If he goes astray, she will forsake him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hand him over to his fall. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_20">20&#160;</span>Watch for the opportunity, and beware of evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be ashamed of your soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_21">21&#160;</span>For there is a shame that brings sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is a shame that is glory and grace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t show partiality, discrediting your soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t revere any man to your falling. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_23">23&#160;</span>Don’t refrain from speaking when it is for safety. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>Don’t hide your wisdom for the sake of seeming fair. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_24">24&#160;</span>For wisdom will be known by speech, </div>
<div class='q2'>and instruction by the word of the tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t speak against the truth </div>
<div class='q'>and be shamed for your ignorance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_26">26&#160;</span>Don’t be ashamed to confess your sins. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t fight the river’s current. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_27">27&#160;</span>Don’t lay yourself down for a fool to tread upon. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be partial to one who is mighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_28">28&#160;</span>Strive for the truth to death, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Lord God will fight for you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t be hasty with your tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>or slack and negligent in your deeds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t be like a lion in your house, </div>
<div class='q2'>or suspicious of your servants. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR4_31">31&#160;</span>Don’t let your hand be stretched out to receive, </div>
<div class='q2'>and closed when you should repay.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t set your heart upon your goods. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t say, “They are sufficient for me.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t follow your own mind and your strength </div>
<div class='q2'>to walk in the desires of your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t say, “Who will have dominion over me?” </div>
<div class='q2'>for the Lord will surely take vengeance on you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t say, “I sinned, and what happened to me?” </div>
<div class='q2'>for the Lord is patient. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t be so confident of atonement </div>
<div class='q2'>that you add sin upon sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t say, “His compassion is great. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be pacified for the multitude of my sins,” </div>
<div class='q2'>for mercy and wrath are with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his indignation will rest on sinners. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t wait to turn to the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t put off from day to day; </div>
<div class='q2'>for suddenly the wrath of the Lord will come on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will perish in the time of vengeance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t set your heart upon unrighteous gains, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you will profit nothing in the day of calamity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t winnow with every wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t walk in every path. </div>
<div class='q2'>This is what the sinner who has a double tongue does. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_10">10&#160;</span>Be steadfast in your understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your speech be consistent. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_11">11&#160;</span>Be swift to hear </div>
<div class='q2'>and answer with patience. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_12">12&#160;</span>If you have understanding, answer your neighbor; </div>
<div class='q2'>but if not, put your hand over your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_13">13&#160;</span>Glory and dishonor is in talk. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man’s tongue may be his downfall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t be called a whisperer. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t lie in wait with your tongue; </div>
<div class='q2'>for shame is on the thief, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an evil condemnation is on him who has a double tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR5_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t be ignorant in a great or small matter.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t become an enemy instead of a friend; </div>
<div class='q2'>for an evil name will inherit shame and reproach. </div>
<div class='q2'>So it is with the sinner who has a double tongue. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t exalt yourself in the counsel of your soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>that your soul not be torn in pieces like a bull. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_3">3&#160;</span>You will eat up your leaves, destroy your fruit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and leave yourself like a dry tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_4">4&#160;</span>A wicked soul will destroy him who has it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make him a laughing stock to his enemies. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_5">5&#160;</span>Sweet words will multiply a man’s friends. </div>
<div class='q2'>A gracious tongue will multiply courtesies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_6">6&#160;</span>Let those that are at peace with you be many, </div>
<div class='q2'>but your advisers one of a thousand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_7">7&#160;</span>If you want to gain a friend, get him in a time of testing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be in a hurry to trust him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_8">8&#160;</span>For there is a friend just for an occasion. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t continue in the day of your affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_9">9&#160;</span>And there is a friend who turns into an enemy. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will discover strife to your reproach. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_10">10&#160;</span>And there is a friend who is a companion at the table, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he won’t continue in the day of your affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_11">11&#160;</span>In your prosperity he will be as yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be bold over your servants. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_12">12&#160;</span>If you are brought low, he will be against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will hide himself from your face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_13">13&#160;</span>Separate yourself from your enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beware of your friends. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_14">14&#160;</span>A faithful friend is a strong defense. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has found him has found a treasure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_15">15&#160;</span>There is nothing that can be taken in exchange for a faithful friend. </div>
<div class='q2'>His excellency is beyond price. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_16">16&#160;</span>A faithful friend is a life-saving medicine. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who fear the Lord will find him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_17">17&#160;</span>He who fears the Lord directs his friendship properly; </div>
<div class='q2'>for as he is, so is his neighbor also. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_18">18&#160;</span>My son, gather instruction from your youth up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Even when you have gray hair you will find wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_19">19&#160;</span>Come to her as one who plows and sows </div>
<div class='q2'>and wait for her good fruit; </div>
<div class='q'>for your toil will be little in her cultivation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will soon eat of her fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_20">20&#160;</span>How exceedingly harsh she is to the unlearned! </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is without understanding will not remain in her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_21">21&#160;</span>She will rest upon him as a mighty stone of trial. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t hesitate to cast her from him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_22">22&#160;</span>For wisdom is according to her name. </div>
<div class='q'>She isn’t manifest to many. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_23">23&#160;</span>Give ear, my son, and accept my judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t refuse my counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_24">24&#160;</span>Bring your feet into her fetters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your neck into her chain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_25">25&#160;</span>Put your shoulder under her and bear her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be grieved with her bonds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_26">26&#160;</span>Come to her with all your soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep her ways with your whole power. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_27">27&#160;</span>Search and seek, and she will be made known to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>When you get hold of her, don’t let her go. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_28">28&#160;</span>For at the last you will find her rest; </div>
<div class='q2'>and she will be turned for you into gladness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_29">29&#160;</span>Her fetters will be to you for a covering of strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her chains for a robe of glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_30">30&#160;</span>For there is a golden ornament upon her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her bands are <a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> a purple cord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_31">31&#160;</span>You shall put her on as a robe of glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shall put her on as a crown of rejoicing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_32">32&#160;</span>My son, if you are willing, you will be instructed. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you will yield your soul, you will be prudent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_33">33&#160;</span>If you love to hear, you will receive. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you incline your ear, you will be wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_34">34&#160;</span>Stand in the multitude of the elders. </div>
<div class='q2'>Attach yourself to whomever is wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_35">35&#160;</span>Be willing to listen to every godly discourse. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let the proverbs of understanding escape you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_36">36&#160;</span>If you see a man of understanding, get to him early. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your foot wear out the steps of his doors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR6_37">37&#160;</span>Let your mind dwell on the ordinances of the Lord </div>
<div class='q2'>and meditate continually on his commandments. </div>
<div class='q'>He will establish your heart </div>
<div class='q2'>and your desire for wisdom will be given to you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_1">1&#160;</span>Do no evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>so no evil will overtake you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_2">2&#160;</span>Depart from wrong, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will turn away from you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_3">3&#160;</span>My son, don’t sow upon the furrows of unrighteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you won’t reap them sevenfold. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t seek preeminence from the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the seat of honor from the king. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t justify yourself in the presence of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t display your wisdom before the king. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t seek to be a judge, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you not be able to take away iniquities, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps you fear the person of a mighty man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lay a stumbling block in the way of your uprightness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t sin against the multitude of the city. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t disgrace yourself in the crowd. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t commit a sin twice, </div>
<div class='q2'>for even in one you will not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t say, “He will look upon the multitude of my gifts. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I make an offering to the Most High God, he will accept it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t be faint-hearted in your prayer. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t neglect to give alms. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t laugh a man to scorn when he is in the bitterness of his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there is one who humbles and exalts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_12">12&#160;</span> <a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Don’t devise a lie against your brother, </div>
<div class='q2'>or do the same to a friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_13">13&#160;</span>Refuse to utter a lie, </div>
<div class='q2'>for that habit results in no good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t babble in the assembly of elders. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t repeat your words in your prayer. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t hate hard labor </div>
<div class='q2'>or farm work, which the Most High has created. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_16">16&#160;</span>Don’t number yourself among the multitude of sinners. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember that wrath will not wait. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_17">17&#160;</span>Humble your soul greatly, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the punishment of the ungodly man is fire and the worm. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_18">18&#160;</span>Don’t exchange a friend for something, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither a true brother for the gold of Ophir. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_19">19&#160;</span>Don’t deprive yourself of a wise and good wife, </div>
<div class='q2'>for her grace is worth more than gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t abuse a servant who works faithfully, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a hireling who gives you his life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_21">21&#160;</span>Let your soul love a wise servant. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t defraud him of liberty. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_22">22&#160;</span>Do you have cattle? Look after them. </div>
<div class='q2'>If they are profitable to you, let them stay by you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_23">23&#160;</span>Do you have children? Correct them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make them obedient from their youth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_24">24&#160;</span>Do you have daughters? Take care of their bodies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be overly indulgent toward them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_25">25&#160;</span>Give your daughter in marriage, and you will have accomplished a great matter. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give her to a man of understanding. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_26">26&#160;</span>Do you have a wife who pleases you? Don’t cast her out. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> But don’t trust yourself to one who is hateful. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_27">27&#160;</span>Honor your father with your whole heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t forget the birth pangs of your mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_28">28&#160;</span>Remember that you were born of them. </div>
<div class='q2'>What will you repay them for the things that they have done for you? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_29">29&#160;</span>Fear the Lord with all your soul; </div>
<div class='q2'>and revere his priests. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_30">30&#160;</span>With all your strength love him who made you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t forsake his ministers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_31">31&#160;</span>Fear the Lord and honor the priest. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give him his portion, even as it is commanded you: </div>
<div class='q2'>the first fruits, the trespass offering, the gift of the shoulders, </div>
<div class='q2'>the sacrifice of sanctification, and the first fruits of holy things. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_32">32&#160;</span>Also stretch out your hand to the poor man, </div>
<div class='q2'>that your blessing may be complete. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_33">33&#160;</span>A gift has grace in the sight of every living man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t withhold grace for a dead man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_34">34&#160;</span>Don’t avoid those who weep, </div>
<div class='q2'>and mourn with those who mourn. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_35">35&#160;</span>Don’t be slow to visit a sick man, </div>
<div class='q2'>for by such things you will gain love. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR7_36">36&#160;</span>In all your words, remember eternity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will never sin. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t contend with a mighty man, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps you fall into his hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t strive with a rich man, lest perhaps he overpower you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for gold has destroyed many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and turned away the hearts of kings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t argue with a loudmouthed man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t heap wood upon his fire. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t make fun of a rude man, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest your ancestors be dishonored. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t reproach a man when he turns from sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember that we are all worthy of punishment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t dishonor a man in his old age, </div>
<div class='q2'>for some of us are also growing old. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t rejoice over anyone’s death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember that we all die. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t neglect the discourse of the wise. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be conversant with their proverbs; </div>
<div class='q2'>for from them you will learn discipline </div>
<div class='q2'>and how to serve great men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t miss the discourse of the aged, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they also learned from their parents, </div>
<div class='q2'>because from them you will learn understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to give an answer in time of need. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t kindle the coals of a sinner, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you be burned with the flame of his fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t rise up from the presence of an insolent man, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he lie in wait as an ambush for your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t lend to a man who is stronger than you; </div>
<div class='q2'>and if you lend, count it as a loss. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t be surety beyond your means. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you give surety, think as one who will have to pay. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t go to law with a judge; </div>
<div class='q2'>for according to his honor they will give judgment for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t travel with a reckless man, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he be burdensome to you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will do as he pleases, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will perish with his folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_16">16&#160;</span>Don’t fight with a wrathful man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t travel with him through the desert, </div>
<div class='q2'>for blood is as nothing in his sight. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where there is no help, he will overthrow you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t consult with a fool, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will not be able to keep a secret. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_18">18&#160;</span>Do no secret thing before a stranger, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you don’t know what it will cause. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR8_19">19&#160;</span>Don’t open your heart to every man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let him return you a favor. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t be jealous over the wife of your bosom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t teach her an evil lesson against yourself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t give your soul to a woman </div>
<div class='q2'>and let her trample down your strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t go to meet a woman who plays the prostitute, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps you fall into her snares. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t with a woman who is a singer, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps you be caught by her tricks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t gaze at a virgin, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps you stumble and incur penalties for her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t give your soul to prostitutes, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you not lose your inheritance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t look around in the streets of the city. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t wander in its deserted places. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_8">8&#160;</span>Turn your eye away from a beautiful woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t gaze at another’s beauty. </div>
<div class='q'>Many have been led astray by the beauty of a woman; </div>
<div class='q2'>and with this, passion is kindled like a fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t dine at all with a woman who has a husband, </div>
<div class='q2'>or revel with her at wine,<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps your soul turn away to her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with your spirit you slide into destruction. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t forsake an old friend; </div>
<div class='q2'>for a new one is not comparable to him. </div>
<div class='q'>A new friend is like new wine: </div>
<div class='q2'>if it becomes old, you will drink it with gladness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t envy the success of a sinner; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you don’t know what his end will be. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t delight in the delights of the ungodly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember they will not go unpunished to<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> the grave. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_13">13&#160;</span>Keep yourself far from the man who has<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> power to kill, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will not be troubled by the fear of death. </div>
<div class='q'>If you come to him, commit no fault, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he take away your life. </div>
<div class='q'>Know surely that you go about in the midst of snares, </div>
<div class='q2'>and walk upon the battlements of a city. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_14">14&#160;</span>As well as you can, aim to know your neighbors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and take counsel with the wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_15">15&#160;</span>Let your conversation be with men of understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let all your discourse be in the law of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_16">16&#160;</span>Let righteous people be companions at your table. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your glorying be in the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_17">17&#160;</span>A work is commended because of the skill of the artisan; </div>
<div class='q2'>so he who rules the people will be considered wise for his speech. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR9_18">18&#160;</span>A loudmouthed man is dangerous in his city. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is reckless in his speech will be hated. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_1">1&#160;</span>A wise judge will instruct his people. </div>
<div class='q2'>The government of a man of understanding will be well ordered. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_2">2&#160;</span>As is the judge of his people, so are his officials. </div>
<div class='q2'>As the city’s ruler is, so are all those who dwell in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_3">3&#160;</span>An undisciplined king will destroy his people. </div>
<div class='q2'>A city will be established through the understanding of the powerful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_4">4&#160;</span>The government of the earth is in the Lord’s hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>In due time, he will raise up over it the right person at the right time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_5">5&#160;</span>A man’s prosperity is in the Lord’s hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will lay his honor upon the person of the scribe. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t be angry with your neighbor for every wrong. </div>
<div class='q2'>Do nothing by works of violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_7">7&#160;</span>Pride is hateful before the Lord and men. </div>
<div class='q2'>Arrogance is abhorrent in the judgment of both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_8">8&#160;</span>Sovereignty is transferred from nation to nation </div>
<div class='q2'>because of injustice, violence, and greed for money. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_9">9&#160;</span> Why are dirt and ashes proud?<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>Because in life, my body decays. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_10">10&#160;</span> A long disease mocks the physician. </div>
<div class='q2'>The king of today will die tomorrow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_11">11&#160;</span>For when a man is dead, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will inherit maggots, vermin, and worms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_12">12&#160;</span> It is the beginning of pride when a man departs from the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>His heart has departed from him who made him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_13">13&#160;</span>For the beginning of pride is sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who keeps it will pour out abomination. </div>
<div class='q'>For this cause the Lord brought upon them strange calamities </div>
<div class='q2'>and utterly overthrew them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_14">14&#160;</span>The Lord cast down the thrones of rulers </div>
<div class='q2'>and set the lowly in their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_15">15&#160;</span>The Lord plucked up the roots of nations </div>
<div class='q2'>and planted the lowly in their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_16">16&#160;</span>The Lord overthrew the lands of nations </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroyed them to the foundations of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_17">17&#160;</span>He took some of them away and destroyed them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made their memory to cease from the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_18">18&#160;</span>Pride has not been created for men, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor wrathful anger for the offspring of women. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_19">19&#160;</span> Whose offspring has honor? </div>
<div class='q2'>Human offspring who fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>Whose offspring has no honor? </div>
<div class='q2'>Human offspring who break the commandments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_20">20&#160;</span>In the midst of kindred he who rules them has honor. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who fear the Lord have honor in his eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="SR10_21">21&#160;</span> <a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_22">22&#160;</span>The rich man, the honorable, and the poor </div>
<div class='q2'>all glory in the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_23">23&#160;</span>It is not right to dishonor a poor man who has understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is not fitting to glorify a man who is a sinner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_24">24&#160;</span>The prince, the judge, and the mighty man will be honored. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is not one of them greater than he who fears the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_25">25&#160;</span>Free men will minister to a wise servant. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man who has knowledge will not complain. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_26">26&#160;</span>Don’t flaunt your wisdom in doing your work. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t boast in the time of your distress. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_27">27&#160;</span> <a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> Better is he who labors and abounds in all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>Than he who boasts and lacks bread. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_28">28&#160;</span>My son, glorify your soul in humility, </div>
<div class='q2'>and ascribe to yourself honor according to your worthiness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_29">29&#160;</span>Who will justify him who sins against his own soul? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will honor him who dishonors his own life? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_30">30&#160;</span>A poor man is honored for his knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>A rich man is honored for his riches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR10_31">31&#160;</span>But he who is honored in poverty, how much more in riches? </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is dishonored in riches, how much more in poverty? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_1">1&#160;</span>The wisdom of the lowly will lift up his head, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make him sit in the midst of great men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t commend a man for his good looks. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t abhor a man for his outward appearance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_3">3&#160;</span>The bee is little among flying creatures, </div>
<div class='q2'>but what it produces is the best of confections. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t boast about the clothes you wear, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t exalt yourself in the day of honor; </div>
<div class='q'>for the Lord’s works are wonderful, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his works are hidden among men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_5">5&#160;</span>Many<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> kings have sat down upon the ground, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who was never thought of has worn a crown. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_6">6&#160;</span>Many mighty men have been greatly disgraced. </div>
<div class='q2'>Men of renown have been delivered into other men’s hands. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t blame before you investigate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Understand first, and then rebuke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t answer before you have heard. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t interrupt while someone else is speaking. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t argue about a matter that doesn’t concern you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t sit with sinners when they judge. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_10">10&#160;</span>My son, don’t be busy about many matters; </div>
<div class='q2'>for if you meddle much, you will not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>If you pursue, you will not overtake, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will not escape by fleeing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_11">11&#160;</span>There is one who toils, labors, and hurries, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is even more behind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_12">12&#160;</span>There is one who is sluggish, and needs help, </div>
<div class='q2'>lacking in strength, and who abounds in poverty, </div>
<div class='q'>but the Lord’s eyes looked upon him for good, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he raised him up from his low condition, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_13">13&#160;</span>and lifted up his head </div>
<div class='q2'>so that many marveled at him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_14">14&#160;</span>Good things and bad, life and death, </div>
<div class='q2'>poverty and riches, are from the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="SR11_15-16">15-16&#160;</span> <a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_17">17&#160;</span>The Lord’s gift remains with the godly. </div>
<div class='q2'>His good pleasure will prosper forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_18">18&#160;</span>One grows rich by his diligence and self-denial, </div>
<div class='q2'>and this is the portion of his reward: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_19">19&#160;</span>when he says, “I have found rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and now I will eat of my goods!” </div>
<div class='q'>he doesn’t know how much time will pass </div>
<div class='q2'>until he leaves them to others and dies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_20">20&#160;</span>Be steadfast in your covenant and be doing it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and grow old in your work. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t marvel at the works of a sinner, </div>
<div class='q2'>but trust the Lord and stay in your labor; </div>
<div class='q'>for it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord </div>
<div class='q2'>to swiftly and suddenly make a poor man rich. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_22">22&#160;</span>The Lord’s blessing is in the reward of the godly. </div>
<div class='q2'>He makes his blessing flourish in an hour that comes swiftly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_23">23&#160;</span>Don’t say, “What use is there of me? </div>
<div class='q2'>What further good things can be mine?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_24">24&#160;</span>Don’t say, “I have enough. </div>
<div class='q2'>What harm could happen to me now?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_25">25&#160;</span>In the day of good things, bad things are forgotten. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the day of bad things, a man will not remember things that are good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_26">26&#160;</span>For it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord </div>
<div class='q2'>to reward a man in the day of death according to his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_27">27&#160;</span>The affliction of an hour causes delights to be forgotten. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the end, a man’s deeds are revealed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_28">28&#160;</span>Call no man happy before his death. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man will be known in his children. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t bring every man into your house, </div>
<div class='q2'>for many are the tricks of a deceitful man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_30">30&#160;</span>Like a decoy partridge in a cage, so is the heart of a proud man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Like a spy, he looks for your weakness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_31">31&#160;</span>For he lies in wait to turn things that are good into evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and assigns blame in things that are praiseworthy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_32">32&#160;</span>From a spark of fire, a heap of many coals is kindled, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a sinful man lies in wait to shed blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_33">33&#160;</span>Take heed of an evil-doer, for he plans wicked things, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest perhaps he ruin your reputation forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR11_34">34&#160;</span>Receive a stranger into your house, and he will distract you with arguments </div>
<div class='q2'>and estrange you from your own family. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_1">1&#160;</span>If you do good, know to whom you do it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your good deeds will have thanks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_2">2&#160;</span>Do good to a godly man, and you will find a reward— </div>
<div class='q2'>if not from him, then from the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_3">3&#160;</span>No good will come to him who continues to do evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor to him who gives no alms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_4">4&#160;</span>Give to the godly man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t help the sinner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_5">5&#160;</span>Do good to one who is lowly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t give to an ungodly man. </div>
<div class='q'>Keep back his bread, and don’t give it to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he subdue you with it; </div>
<div class='q'>for you would receive twice as much evil </div>
<div class='q2'>for all the good you would have done to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_6">6&#160;</span>For the Most High also hates sinners, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will repay vengeance to the ungodly.<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_7">7&#160;</span>Give to the good man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t help the sinner. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_8">8&#160;</span>A man’s friend won’t be<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> fully tried in prosperity. </div>
<div class='q2'>His enemy won’t be hidden in adversity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_9">9&#160;</span>In a man’s prosperity, his enemies are grieved. </div>
<div class='q2'>In his adversity, even his friend leaves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_10">10&#160;</span>Never trust your enemy, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his wickedness is like corrosion in copper. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_11">11&#160;</span>Though he humbles himself and walks bowed down, </div>
<div class='q2'>still be careful and beware of him. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be to him as one who has wiped a mirror, </div>
<div class='q2'>to be sure it doesn’t completely tarnish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t set him next to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he overthrow you and stand in your place. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t let him sit on your right hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he seek to take your seat, </div>
<div class='q'>and at the last you acknowledge my words, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be pricked with my sayings. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_13">13&#160;</span>Who will pity a charmer that is bitten by a snake, </div>
<div class='q2'>or any who come near wild beasts? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_14">14&#160;</span>Even so, who will pity him who goes to a sinner, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is associated with him in his sins? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_15">15&#160;</span>For a while he will stay with you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and if you falter, he will not stay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_16">16&#160;</span>The enemy will speak sweetly with his lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in his heart plan to throw you into a pit. </div>
<div class='q'>The enemy may weep with his eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but if he finds opportunity, he will want more blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_17">17&#160;</span>If adversity meets you, you will find him there before you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pretending to help you, he will trip you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR12_18">18&#160;</span>He will shake his head, clap his hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>whisper much, and change his countenance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_1">1&#160;</span>He who touches pitch will be defiled. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has fellowship with a proud man will become like him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_2">2&#160;</span>Don’t take up a burden above your strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>Have no fellowship with one who is mightier and richer than yourself. </div>
<div class='q'>What fellowship would the earthen pot have with the kettle? </div>
<div class='q2'>The kettle will strike, and the pot will be dashed in pieces. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_3">3&#160;</span>The rich man does a wrong and threatens. </div>
<div class='q2'>The poor is wronged and apologizes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_4">4&#160;</span>If you are profitable, he will exploit you. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you are in need, he will forsake you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_5">5&#160;</span>If you own something, he will live with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will drain your resources and will not be sorry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_6">6&#160;</span>Does he need you? Then he will deceive you, </div>
<div class='q2'>smile at you, and give you hope. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will speak kindly to you and say, “What do you need?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_7">7&#160;</span>He will shame you by his delicacies </div>
<div class='q2'>until he has made you bare twice or thrice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the end he will laugh you to scorn. </div>
<div class='q'>Afterward he will see you, will forsake you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shake his head at you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_8">8&#160;</span>Beware that you are not deceived </div>
<div class='q2'>and brought low in your enjoyment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_9">9&#160;</span>If a mighty man invites you, be reserved, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will invite you more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t press him, lest you be thrust back. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t stand far off, lest you be forgotten. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t try to speak with him as an equal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t believe his many words; </div>
<div class='q'>for he will test you with much talk, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will examine you in a smiling manner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_12">12&#160;</span>He who doesn’t keep secrets to himself is unmerciful. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t hesitate to harm and to bind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_13">13&#160;</span>Keep them to yourself and be careful, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you walk<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> in danger of falling. 
<span class="verse" id="SR13_14">14&#160;</span> <a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_15">15&#160;</span>Every living creature loves its own kind, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every man loves his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_16">16&#160;</span>All flesh associates with their own kind. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man will stick to people like himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_17">17&#160;</span>What fellowship would the wolf have with the lamb? </div>
<div class='q2'>So is the sinner to the godly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_18">18&#160;</span>What peace is there between a hyena and a dog? </div>
<div class='q2'>What peace is there between a rich man and the poor? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_19">19&#160;</span>Wild donkeys are the prey of lions in the wilderness; </div>
<div class='q2'>likewise poor men are feeding grounds for the rich. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_20">20&#160;</span>Lowliness is an abomination to a proud man; </div>
<div class='q2'>likewise a poor man is an abomination to the rich. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_21">21&#160;</span>When a rich man is shaken, he is supported by his friends, </div>
<div class='q2'>but when the humble is down, he is pushed away even by his friends. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_22">22&#160;</span>When a rich man falls, there are many helpers. </div>
<div class='q2'>He speaks things not to be spoken, and men justify him. </div>
<div class='q'>A humble man falls, and men rebuke him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He utters wisdom, and is not listened to. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_23">23&#160;</span>A rich man speaks, and all keep silence. </div>
<div class='q2'>They extol what he says to the clouds. </div>
<div class='q'>A poor man speaks, and they say, “Who is this?” </div>
<div class='q2'>If he stumbles, they will help to overthrow him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_24">24&#160;</span>Riches are good if they have no sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>Poverty is evil only in the opinion of the ungodly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_25">25&#160;</span>The heart of a man changes his countenance, </div>
<div class='q2'>whether it is for good or for evil.<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR13_26">26&#160;</span>A cheerful countenance is a sign of a prosperous heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Devising proverbs takes strenuous thinking.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_1">1&#160;</span>Blessed is the man who has not slipped with his mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t suffer from sorrow for sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_2">2&#160;</span>Blessed is he whose soul does not condemn him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who has not given up hope. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_3">3&#160;</span>Riches are not appropriate for a stingy person. </div>
<div class='q2'>What would a miser do with money? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_4">4&#160;</span>He who gathers by denying himself gathers for others. </div>
<div class='q2'>Others will revel in his goods. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_5">5&#160;</span>If one is mean to himself, to whom will he be good? </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t enjoy his possessions. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_6">6&#160;</span>There is none more evil than he who is grudging to himself. </div>
<div class='q2'>This is a punishment for his wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_7">7&#160;</span>Even if he does good, he does it in forgetfulness. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the end, he reveals his wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_8">8&#160;</span>A miser is evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>He turns away and disregards souls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_9">9&#160;</span>A covetous man’s eye is not satisfied with his portion. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wicked injustice dries up his soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_10">10&#160;</span>A miser begrudges bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it is lacking at his table. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_11">11&#160;</span>My son, according to what you have, treat yourself well, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bring worthy offerings to the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_12">12&#160;</span>Remember that death will not wait, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that the covenant of Hades hasn’t been shown to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_13">13&#160;</span>Do good to your friends before you die. </div>
<div class='q2'>According to your ability, reach out and give to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t deprive yourself of a good day. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let your share of a desired good pass you by. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_15">15&#160;</span>Won’t you leave your labors to another, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your toils be divided by lot? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_16">16&#160;</span>Give, take, and treat yourself well, </div>
<div class='q2'>because there is no seeking of luxury in Hades. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_17">17&#160;</span>All flesh grows old like a garment, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the covenant from the beginning is, “You must die!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_18">18&#160;</span>Like the leaves flourishing on a thick tree, </div>
<div class='q2'>some it sheds, and some grow, </div>
<div class='q'>so also are the generations of flesh and blood: </div>
<div class='q2'>one comes to an end and another is born. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_19">19&#160;</span>Every work rots and falls away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its builder will depart with it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_20">20&#160;</span>Blessed is the man who meditates on wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who reasons by his understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_21">21&#160;</span>He who considers her ways in his heart </div>
<div class='q2'>will also have knowledge of her secrets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_22">22&#160;</span>Go after her like a hunter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lie in wait in her paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_23">23&#160;</span>He who peers in at her windows </div>
<div class='q2'>will also listen at her doors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_24">24&#160;</span>He who lodges close to her house </div>
<div class='q2'>will also fasten a nail in her walls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_25">25&#160;</span>He will pitch his tent near at hand to her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will lodge in a lodging where good things are. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_26">26&#160;</span>He will set his children under her shelter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will rest under her branches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR14_27">27&#160;</span>By her he will be covered from heat, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will lodge in her glory.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_1">1&#160;</span>He who fears the Lord will do this. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has possession of the law will obtain her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_2">2&#160;</span>She will meet him like a mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>and receive him like a wife married in her virginity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_3">3&#160;</span>She will feed him with bread of understanding </div>
<div class='q2'>and give him water of wisdom to drink. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_4">4&#160;</span>He will be stayed upon her, and will not be moved. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will rely upon her, and will not be confounded. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_5">5&#160;</span>She will exalt him above his neighbors. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will open his mouth in the midst of the congregation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_6">6&#160;</span>He will inherit joy, a crown of gladness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an everlasting name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_7">7&#160;</span>Foolish men will not obtain her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sinners will not see her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_8">8&#160;</span>She is far from pride. </div>
<div class='q2'>Liars will not remember her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_9">9&#160;</span>Praise is not attractive in the mouth of a sinner; </div>
<div class='q2'>for it was not sent to him from the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_10">10&#160;</span>For praise will be spoken in wisdom; </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord will prosper it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t say, “It is through the Lord that I fell away;” </div>
<div class='q2'>for you shall not do the things that he hates. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t say, “It is he that caused me to err;” </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has no need of a sinful man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_13">13&#160;</span>The Lord hates every abomination; </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who fear him don’t love them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_14">14&#160;</span>He himself made man from the beginning </div>
<div class='q2'>and left him in the hand of his own counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_15">15&#160;</span>If you choose, you can keep the commandments. </div>
<div class='q2'>To be faithful is a matter of your choice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_16">16&#160;</span>He has set fire and water before you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will stretch forth your hand to whichever you desire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_17">17&#160;</span>Before man is life and death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whichever he likes, it will be given to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_18">18&#160;</span>For the wisdom of the Lord is great. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is mighty in power, and sees all things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_19">19&#160;</span>His eyes are upon those who fear him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He knows every act of man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR15_20">20&#160;</span>He has not commanded any man to be ungodly. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has not given any man license to sin. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t desire a multitude of unprofitable children, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither delight in ungodly sons. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_2">2&#160;</span>If they multiply, don’t delight in them </div>
<div class='q2'>unless the fear of the Lord is in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t trust in their life. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t rely on their numbers; </div>
<div class='q2'>for one can be better than a thousand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to die childless than to have ungodly children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_4">4&#160;</span>For from one who has understanding, a city will be populated, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a race of wicked men will be made desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_5">5&#160;</span>I have seen many such things with my eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>My ear has heard mightier things than these. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_6">6&#160;</span>In a congregation of sinners, a fire will be kindled. </div>
<div class='q2'>In a disobedient nation, wrath is kindled. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_7">7&#160;</span>He was not pacified toward the giants of old time, </div>
<div class='q2'>who revolted in their strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_8">8&#160;</span>He didn’t spare Lot’s neighbors, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom he abhorred for their pride. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_9">9&#160;</span>He didn’t pity the people of perdition </div>
<div class='q2'>who were taken away in their sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_10">10&#160;</span>or in like manner, the six hundred thousand footmen </div>
<div class='q2'>who were gathered together in the hardness of their hearts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_11">11&#160;</span>Even if there is one stiff-necked person, </div>
<div class='q2'>it is a marvel if he will be unpunished; </div>
<div class='q2'>for mercy and wrath are both with him who is mighty to forgive, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he pours out wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_12">12&#160;</span>As his mercy is great, so is his correction also. </div>
<div class='q2'>He judges a man according to his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_13">13&#160;</span>The sinner will not escape with plunder. </div>
<div class='q2'>The perseverance of the godly will not be frustrated. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_14">14&#160;</span>He will make room for every work of mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Each man will receive according to his works. 
<span class="verse" id="SR16_15-16">15-16&#160;</span> <a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t say, “I will be hidden from the Lord,” </div>
<div class='q2'>and “Who will remember me from on high?” </div>
<div class='q'>I will not be known among so many people, </div>
<div class='q2'>for what is my soul in a boundless creation? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, the heaven, the heaven of heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>the deep, and the earth, will be moved when he visits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_19">19&#160;</span>The mountains and the foundations of the earth together </div>
<div class='q2'>are shaken with trembling when he looks at them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_20">20&#160;</span>No heart will think about these things. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who could comprehend his ways? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_21">21&#160;</span>Like a tempest which no man can see, </div>
<div class='q2'>so, the majority of his works are<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> hidden. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_22">22&#160;</span>Who will declare his works of righteousness? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will wait for them? </div>
<div class='q2'>For his covenant is afar off.<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_23">23&#160;</span>He who is lacking in<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> understanding thinks about these things. </div>
<div class='q2'>An unwise and erring man thinks foolishly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_24">24&#160;</span>My son, listen to me, learn knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and heed my words with your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_25">25&#160;</span>I will impart instruction with precision, </div>
<div class='q2'>and declare knowledge exactly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_26">26&#160;</span>In the judgment of the Lord are his works from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q2'>From the making of them he determined their boundaries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_27">27&#160;</span>He arranged his works for all time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their beginnings to their generations. </div>
<div class='q'>They aren’t hungry or weary, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they don’t cease from their works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_28">28&#160;</span>No one pushes aside his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will never disobey his word. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_29">29&#160;</span>After this also the Lord looked at the earth </div>
<div class='q2'>and filled it with his blessings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR16_30">30&#160;</span> <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> <a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> All manner of living things covered its surface, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they return into it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_1">1&#160;</span>The Lord created mankind out of earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and turned them back to it again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_2">2&#160;</span>He gave them days by number, and a set time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave them authority over the things that are on it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_3">3&#160;</span>He endowed them with strength proper to them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made them according to his own image. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_4">4&#160;</span>He put the fear of man upon all flesh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave him dominion over beasts and birds. 
<span class="verse" id="SR17_5">5&#160;</span> <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_6">6&#160;</span>He gave them counsel, tongue, eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>ears, and heart to have understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_7">7&#160;</span>He filled them with the knowledge of wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and showed them good and evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_8">8&#160;</span>He set his eye upon their hearts, </div>
<div class='q2'>to show them the majesty of his works. 
<span class="verse" id="SR17_9">9&#160;</span> <a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_10">10&#160;</span>And they will praise his holy name, </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> that they may declare the majesty of his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_11">11&#160;</span>He added to them knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave them a law of life for a heritage. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_12">12&#160;</span>He made an everlasting covenant with them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and showed them his decrees. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_13">13&#160;</span>Their eyes saw the majesty of his glory. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their ears heard the glory of his voice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_14">14&#160;</span>He said to them, “Beware of all unrighteousness.” </div>
<div class='q2'>So he gave them commandment, each man concerning his neighbor. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_15">15&#160;</span>Their ways are ever before him. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will not be hidden from his eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="SR17_16">16&#160;</span> <a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_17">17&#160;</span> <a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> For every nation he appointed a ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Israel is the Lord’s portion. 
<span class="verse" id="SR17_18">18&#160;</span> <a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_19">19&#160;</span>All their works are as clear as the sun before him. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eyes are continually upon their ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_20">20&#160;</span>Their iniquities are not hidden from him. </div>
<div class='q2'>All their sins are before the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="SR17_21">21&#160;</span> <a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_22">22&#160;</span>With him the alms of a man is as a signet. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will keep a man’s kindness as the pupil of the eye. <a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_23">23&#160;</span>Afterwards he will rise up and repay them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and render their repayment upon their head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_24">24&#160;</span>However to those who repent he grants a return. </div>
<div class='q2'>He comforts those who are losing hope. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_25">25&#160;</span>Return to the Lord, and forsake sins. </div>
<div class='q2'>Make your prayer before his face offend less. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_26">26&#160;</span>Turn again to the Most High, and turn away from iniquity.<a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>Greatly hate the abominable thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_27">27&#160;</span>Who will give praise to the Most High in Hades, </div>
<div class='q2'>in place of the living who return thanks? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_28">28&#160;</span>Thanksgiving perishes from the dead, as from one who doesn’t exist. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is in life and health will praise the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_29">29&#160;</span>How great is the mercy of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his forgiveness to those who turn to him! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_30">30&#160;</span>For humans are not capable of everything, </div>
<div class='q2'>because the son of man is not immortal. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_31">31&#160;</span>What is brighter than the sun? Yet even this can be eclipsed. </div>
<div class='q2'>So flesh and blood devise evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR17_32">32&#160;</span>He looks upon the power of the height of heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>while all men are earth and ashes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_1">1&#160;</span>He who lives forever created the whole universe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_2">2&#160;</span>The Lord alone is just. 
<span class="verse" id="SR18_3">3&#160;</span> <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_4">4&#160;</span>He has given power to declare his works to no one. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who could trace out his mighty deeds? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_5">5&#160;</span>Who could measure the strength of his majesty? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who could also proclaim his mercies? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_6">6&#160;</span>As for the wondrous works of the Lord, it is not possible to take from them nor add to them, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is it possible to explore them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_7">7&#160;</span>When a man has finished, then he is just at the beginning. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he stops, then he will be perplexed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_8">8&#160;</span>What is mankind, and what purpose do they serve? </div>
<div class='q2'>What is their good, and what is their evil? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_9">9&#160;</span>The number of man’s days at the most are a hundred years. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_10">10&#160;</span>As a drop of water from the sea, and a pebble from the sand, </div>
<div class='q2'>so are a few years in the day of eternity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_11">11&#160;</span>For this cause the Lord was patient over them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and poured out his mercy upon them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_12">12&#160;</span>He saw and perceived their end, that it is evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore he multiplied his forgiveness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_13">13&#160;</span>The mercy of a man is on his neighbor; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mercy of the Lord is on all flesh: </div>
<div class='q2'>reproving, chastening, teaching, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bringing back, as a shepherd does his flock. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_14">14&#160;</span>He has mercy on those who accept chastening, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that diligently seek after his judgments. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_15">15&#160;</span>My son, don’t add reproach to your good deeds, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no harsh words in any of your giving. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_16">16&#160;</span>Doesn’t the dew relieve the scorching heat? </div>
<div class='q2'>So a word is better than a gift. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, isn’t a word better than a gift? </div>
<div class='q2'>Both are with a gracious person. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_18">18&#160;</span>A fool is ungracious and abusive. </div>
<div class='q2'>The gift of an grudging person consumes the eyes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_19">19&#160;</span>Learn before you speak. </div>
<div class='q2'>Take care of your health before you get sick. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_20">20&#160;</span>Before judgment, examine yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the hour of scrutiny you will find forgiveness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_21">21&#160;</span>Humble yourself before you get sick. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the time of sins, repent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_22">22&#160;</span>Let nothing hinder you to pay your vow in due time. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t wait until death to be released. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_23">23&#160;</span>Before you make a vow, prepare yourself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be like a man who tests the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_24">24&#160;</span>Think about the wrath coming in the days of the end, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the time of vengeance, when he turns away his face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_25">25&#160;</span>In the days of fullness remember the time of hunger. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember poverty and lack in the days of wealth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_26">26&#160;</span>From morning until evening, the time changes. </div>
<div class='q2'>All things are speedy before the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_27">27&#160;</span>A wise man is cautious in everything. </div>
<div class='q2'>In days of sinning, he will beware of offense.<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_28">28&#160;</span>Every man of understanding knows wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will give thanks to him who found her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_29">29&#160;</span>They who were of understanding in sayings also became wise themselves, </div>
<div class='q2'>and poured out apt proverbs. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t go after your lusts. </div>
<div class='q2'>Restrain your appetites. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_31">31&#160;</span>If you give fully to your soul the delight of her desire, </div>
<div class='q'>she will make you<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> the laughing stock of your enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_32">32&#160;</span>Don’t make merry in much luxury, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be tied to its expense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR18_33">33&#160;</span>Don’t be made a beggar by banqueting with borrowed money </div>
<div class='q2'>when you have nothing in your purse.<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_1">1&#160;</span>A worker who is a drunkard will not become rich. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who despises small things will fall little by little. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_2">2&#160;</span>Wine and women will make men of understanding go astray. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who joins with prostitutes is reckless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_3">3&#160;</span>Decay and worms will have him as their heritage. </div>
<div class='q2'>A reckless soul will be taken away. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_4">4&#160;</span>He who is hasty to trust is shallow-hearted. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who sins offends against his own soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_5">5&#160;</span>He who rejoices in wickedness will be condemned.<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_6">6&#160;</span> <a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> He who hates gossip has less wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_7">7&#160;</span>Never repeat what is told you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you won’t lose anything. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_8">8&#160;</span>Whether it is of friend or foe, don’t tell it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Unless it is a sin to you, don’t reveal it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_9">9&#160;</span>For if he has heard you and observed you, </div>
<div class='q2'>when the time comes, he will hate you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_10">10&#160;</span>Have you heard something? Let it die with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be brave: it will not make you burst! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_11">11&#160;</span>A fool will travail in pain with a word, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a woman in labor with a child. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_12">12&#160;</span>As an arrow that sticks in the flesh of the thigh, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is gossip in a fool. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_13">13&#160;</span>Question a friend; it may be he didn’t do it. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he did something, it may be that he may do it no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_14">14&#160;</span>Question your neighbor; it may be he didn’t say it. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he has said it, it may be that he may not say it again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_15">15&#160;</span>Question a friend; for many times there is slander. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t trust every word. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_16">16&#160;</span>There is one who slips, and not from the heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is he who hasn’t sinned with his tongue? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_17">17&#160;</span>Reprove your neighbor before you threaten him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and give place to the law of the Most High. 
<span class="verse" id="SR19_18-19">18-19&#160;</span> <a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_20">20&#160;</span>All wisdom is the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>In all wisdom is the doing of the law. 
<span class="verse" id="SR19_21">21&#160;</span> <a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_22">22&#160;</span>The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The prudence of sinners is not counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_23">23&#160;</span>There is a wickedness, and it is an abomination. </div>
<div class='q'>There is a fool lacking in wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_24">24&#160;</span>Better is one who has little understanding, and fears God, </div>
<div class='q2'>than one who has much intelligence and transgresses the law. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_25">25&#160;</span>There is an exquisite subtlety, and it is unjust. </div>
<div class='q2'>And there is one who perverts favor to gain a judgment.<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_26">26&#160;</span>There is one who does wickedly, who hangs down his head with mourning; </div>
<div class='q2'>but inwardly he is full of deceit, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_27">27&#160;</span>bowing down his face, and pretending to be deaf in one ear. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where he isn’t known, he will take advantage of you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_28">28&#160;</span>And if for lack of power he is hindered from sinning, </div>
<div class='q2'>if he finds opportunity, he will do mischief. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_29">29&#160;</span>A man will be known by his appearance. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who has understanding will be known by his face when you meet him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR19_30">30&#160;</span>A man’s attire, grinning laughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the way he walks show what he is. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_1">1&#160;</span>There is a reproof that is not timely; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is a person who is wise enough to keep silent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_2">2&#160;</span>How good is it to reprove, rather than to be angry. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who confesses will be kept back from harm. 
<span class="verse" id="SR20_3">3&#160;</span> <a href='#FN52' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_4">4&#160;</span>As is the lust of a eunuch to deflower a virgin, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who executes judgments with violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_5">5&#160;</span>There is one who keeps silent and is found wise; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is one who is hated for his much talk. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_6">6&#160;</span>There is one who keeps silent, for he has no answer to make; </div>
<div class='q2'>And there is one who keeps silent, knowing when to speak. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_7">7&#160;</span>A wise man will be silent until his time has come, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the braggart and fool will miss his time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_8">8&#160;</span>He who uses many words will be abhorred. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who takes authority for himself will be hated in it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_9">9&#160;</span>There is a prosperity that a man finds in misfortunes; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is a gain that turns to loss. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_10">10&#160;</span>There is a gift that will not profit you; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is a gift that pays back double. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_11">11&#160;</span>There are losses because of glory; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is one who has lifted up his head from a low estate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_12">12&#160;</span>There is one who buys much for a little, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pays for it again sevenfold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_13">13&#160;</span>He who is wise in words will make himself beloved; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the pleasantries of fools will be wasted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_14">14&#160;</span>The gift of a fool will not profit you,<a href='#FN53' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>for looks for repayment many times instead of one. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_15">15&#160;</span>He will give little and insult much. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will open his mouth like a crier. </div>
<div class='q'>Today he will lend, and tomorrow he will ask for it back. </div>
<div class='q2'>Such a one is a hateful man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_16">16&#160;</span>The fool will say, “I have no friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have no thanks for my good deeds. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who eat my bread have an evil tongue.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_17">17&#160;</span>How often, and of how many, will he be laughed to scorn! <a href='#FN54' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_18">18&#160;</span>A slip on a pavement is better than a slip with the tongue. </div>
<div class='q2'>So the fall of the wicked will come speedily. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_19">19&#160;</span>A man without grace is a tale out of season. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will be continually in the mouth of the ignorant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_20">20&#160;</span>A parable from a fool’s mouth will be rejected; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he won’t tell it in at the proper time. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_21">21&#160;</span>There is one who is hindered from sinning through lack. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he rests, he will not be troubled. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_22">22&#160;</span>There is one who destroys his soul through bashfulness. </div>
<div class='q2'>By a foolish countenance, he will destroy it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_23">23&#160;</span>There is one who for bashfulness makes promises to his friend; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he makes him his enemy for nothing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_24">24&#160;</span>A lie is an ugly blot on a person. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will be continually in the mouth of the ignorant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_25">25&#160;</span>A thief is better than a man who is continually lying, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they both will inherit destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_26">26&#160;</span>The destination of a liar is dishonor. </div>
<div class='q2'>His shame is with him continually. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_27">27&#160;</span>He who is wise in words will advance himself. </div>
<div class='q2'>And one who is prudent will please great men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_28">28&#160;</span>He who tills his land will raise his harvest high. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who pleases great men will get pardon for iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_29">29&#160;</span>Favors and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a muzzle on the mouth, turn away reproofs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_30">30&#160;</span>Wisdom that is hidden, and treasure that is out of sight— </div>
<div class='q2'>what profit is in either of them? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR20_31">31&#160;</span>Better is a man who hides his folly </div>
<div class='q2'>than a man who hides his wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="SR20_32">32&#160;</span> <a href='#FN55' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_1">1&#160;</span>My son, have you sinned? </div>
<div class='q2'>Do it no more; </div>
<div class='q2'>and ask forgiveness for your past sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_2">2&#160;</span>Flee from sin as from the face of a snake; </div>
<div class='q2'>for if you go near, it will bite you. </div>
<div class='q'>Its teeth are like lion’s teeth, </div>
<div class='q2'>slaying people’s souls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_3">3&#160;</span>All iniquity is as a two-edged sword. </div>
<div class='q2'>Its stroke has no healing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_4">4&#160;</span>Terror and violence will waste away riches. </div>
<div class='q2'>So the house of an arrogant man will be laid waste. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_5">5&#160;</span>Supplication from a poor man’s mouth reaches to the ears of<a href='#FN56' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his judgment comes speedily. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_6">6&#160;</span>One who hates reproof is in the path of the sinner. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who fears the Lord will repent in his heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_7">7&#160;</span>He who is mighty in tongue is known far away; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the man of understanding knows when he slips. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_8">8&#160;</span>He who builds his house with other men’s money </div>
<div class='q2'>is like one who gathers stones for his own tomb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_9">9&#160;</span>The congregation of wicked men is as a bundle of tow </div>
<div class='q2'>with a flame of fire at the end of them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_10">10&#160;</span>The way of sinners is paved with stones; </div>
<div class='q2'>and at the end of it is the pit of Hades. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_11">11&#160;</span>He who keeps the law becomes master of its intent. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fulfilment of the fear of the Lord is wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_12">12&#160;</span>He who is not clever will not be instructed. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is a cleverness which makes bitterness abound. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_13">13&#160;</span>The knowledge of a wise man will be made to abound as a flood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his counsel as a fountain of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_14">14&#160;</span>The inward parts of a fool are like a broken vessel. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will hold no knowledge. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_15">15&#160;</span>If a man of knowledge hears a wise word, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will commend it and add to it. </div>
<div class='q'>The wanton man hears it, and it displeases him, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he throws it away behind his back. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_16">16&#160;</span>The chatter of a fool is like a burden in the way, </div>
<div class='q2'>but grace will be found on the lips of the wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_17">17&#160;</span>The utterance of the prudent man will be sought for in the congregation. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will ponder his words in their heart. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_18">18&#160;</span>As a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool. </div>
<div class='q2'>The knowledge of an unwise man is <a href='#FN57' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> talk without sense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_19">19&#160;</span>Instruction is as fetters on the feet of an unwise man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as manacles on the right hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_20">20&#160;</span>A fool lifts up his voice with laughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a clever man smiles quietly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_21">21&#160;</span>Instruction is to a prudent man as an ornament of gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a bracelet upon his right arm. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_22">22&#160;</span>The foot of a fool rushes into a house, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man of experience will be ashamed of entering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_23">23&#160;</span>A foolish man peers into the door of a house, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man who is instructed will stand outside. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_24">24&#160;</span>It is rude for someone to listen at a door, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a prudent person will be grieved with the disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_25">25&#160;</span> <a href='#FN58' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> The lips of strangers will be grieved at these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the words of prudent men will be weighed in the balance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_26">26&#160;</span>The heart of fools is in their mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouth of wise men is their heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_27">27&#160;</span>When the ungodly curses an adversary, </div>
<div class='q2'>he curses his own soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR21_28">28&#160;</span>A whisperer defiles his own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be hated wherever he travels. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_1">1&#160;</span>A slothful man is compared to a stone that is defiled. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone will at hiss at him in his disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_2">2&#160;</span>A slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill. </div>
<div class='q2'>Anyone who picks it up will shake it out of his hand. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_3">3&#160;</span>An undisciplined child is a disgrace to his father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a foolish daughter is born to his loss. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_4">4&#160;</span>A prudent daughter will inherit a husband of her own. </div>
<div class='q2'>She who brings shame is the grief of her father. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_5">5&#160;</span>She who is arrogant brings shame on father and husband. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will be despised by both of them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_6">6&#160;</span>Ill-timed conversation is like music in mourning, </div>
<div class='q2'>but stripes and correction are wisdom in every season. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_7">7&#160;</span>He who teaches a fool is like one who glues potsherds together, </div>
<div class='q2'>even like one who wakes a sleeper out of a deep sleep. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_8">8&#160;</span>He who teaches a fool is as one who teaches a man who slumbers. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the end he will say, “What is it?” 
<span class="verse" id="SR22_9-10">9-10&#160;</span> <a href='#FN59' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_11">11&#160;</span>Weep for the dead, for he lacks light. </div>
<div class='q2'>Weep for a fool, for he lacks understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>Weep more sweetly for the dead, because he has found rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the life of the fool is worse than death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_12">12&#160;</span>Mourning for the dead lasts seven days, </div>
<div class='q2'>but for a fool and an ungodly man, it lasts all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t talk much with a foolish man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t go to one who has no understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>Beware of him, lest you have trouble and be defiled in his onslaught. </div>
<div class='q2'>Turn away from him, and you will find rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you won’t be wearied in his madness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_14">14&#160;</span>What would be heavier than lead? </div>
<div class='q2'>What is its name, but “Fool”? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_15">15&#160;</span>Sand, salt, and a mass of iron is easier to bear </div>
<div class='q2'>than a man without understanding. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_16">16&#160;</span>Timber girded and bound into a building will not be released with shaking. </div>
<div class='q2'>So a heart established in due season on well advised counsel will not be afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_17">17&#160;</span>A heart settled upon a thoughtful understanding </div>
<div class='q2'>is as an ornament of plaster on a polished wall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_18">18&#160;</span>Fences set on a high place will not stand against the wind; </div>
<div class='q2'>so a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool will not stand against any fear. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_19">19&#160;</span>He who pricks the eye will make tears fall. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who pricks the heart makes it show feeling. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_20">20&#160;</span>Whoever casts a stone at birds scares them away. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who insults a friend will dissolve friendship. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_21">21&#160;</span>If you have drawn a sword against a friend, don’t despair, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there may be a way back. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_22">22&#160;</span>If you have opened your mouth against a friend, don’t be afraid, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there may be reconciliation, </div>
<div class='q2'>unless it is for insulting, arrogance, disclosing of a secret, or a treacherous blow— </div>
<div class='q2'>for these things any friend will flee. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_23">23&#160;</span>Gain trust with your neighbor in his poverty, </div>
<div class='q2'>that in his prosperity you may have gladness. </div>
<div class='q'>Stay steadfast to him in the time of his affliction, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be heir with him in his inheritance.<a href='#FN60' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_24">24&#160;</span>Before fire is the vapor and smoke of a furnace, </div>
<div class='q2'>so insults precede bloodshed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_25">25&#160;</span>I won’t be ashamed to shelter a friend. </div>
<div class='q2'>I won’t hide myself from his face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_26">26&#160;</span>If any evil happens to me because of him, </div>
<div class='q2'>everyone who hears it will beware of him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR22_27">27&#160;</span>Who will set a watch over my mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a seal of shrewdness upon my lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I may not fall from it, and that my tongue may not destroy me?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_1">1&#160;</span>O Lord, Father and Master of my life, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t abandon me to their counsel. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let me fall because of them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_2">2&#160;</span>Who will set scourges over my thought, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a discipline of wisdom over my heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they spare me not for my errors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not overlook their sins? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_3">3&#160;</span>Otherwise my errors might be multiplied, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my sins abound, </div>
<div class='q2'>I fall before my adversaries, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my enemy rejoice over me.<a href='#FN61' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_4">4&#160;</span>O Lord, Father and God of my life, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t give me a haughty eyes,<a href='#FN62' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_5">5&#160;</span>and turn away evil desire from me.<a href='#FN63' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_6">6&#160;</span>Let neither gluttony nor lust overtake me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t give me over to a shameless mind. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_7">7&#160;</span>Listen, my children, to the discipline of the mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who keeps it will not be caught. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_8">8&#160;</span>The sinner will be overpowered through his lips. </div>
<div class='q2'>By them, the insulter and the arrogant will stumble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t accustom your mouth to an oath, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be accustomed to naming the Holy One, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_10">10&#160;</span>for as a servant who is continually scourged will not lack bruises, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he also who swears and continually utters the Name will not be cleansed from sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_11">11&#160;</span>A man of many oaths will be filled with iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>The scourge will not depart from his house. </div>
<div class='q'>If he offends, his sin will be upon him. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he disregards it, he has sinned doubly. </div>
<div class='q'>If he has sworn falsely, he will not be justified, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his house will be filled with calamities. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_12">12&#160;</span>There is a manner of speech that is clothed with death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let it not be found in the heritage of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>for all these things will be far from the godly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will not wallow in sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t accustom your mouth to gross rudeness, </div>
<div class='q2'>for it involves sinful speech. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_14">14&#160;</span>Remember your father and your mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you sit in the midst of great men, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you be not forgetful before them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and become a fool by your bad habit; </div>
<div class='q'>so you may wish that you had not been born, </div>
<div class='q2'>and curse the day of your birth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_15">15&#160;</span>A man who is accustomed to abusive language </div>
<div class='q2'>won’t be corrected all the days of his life. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_16">16&#160;</span>Two sorts of people multiply sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the third will bring wrath: </div>
<div class='q2'>a hot passion, like a burning fire, will not be quenched until it is consumed; </div>
<div class='q2'>a fornicator in the body of his flesh will never cease until he has burned out the fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_17">17&#160;</span>All bread is sweet to a fornicator. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will not cease until he dies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_18">18&#160;</span>A man who goes astray from his own marriage bed </div>
<div class='q2'>says in his heart, “Who sees me? </div>
<div class='q'>Darkness is around me, and the walls hide me. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one sees me. Of whom am I afraid? </div>
<div class='q2'>The Most High will not remember my sins.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_19">19&#160;</span>The eyes of men are his terror. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t know that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the sun, </div>
<div class='q2'>seeing all the ways of men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and looking into secret places. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_20">20&#160;</span>All things were known to him before they were created, </div>
<div class='q2'>and also after they were completed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_21">21&#160;</span>This man will be punished in the streets of the city. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be seized where he least expects it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_22">22&#160;</span>So also is a wife who leaves her husband, </div>
<div class='q2'>and produces an heir by another man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_23">23&#160;</span>For first, she was disobedient in the law of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q2'>Second, she trespassed against her own husband. </div>
<div class='q2'>Third, she played the adulteress in whoredom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and had children by another man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_24">24&#160;</span>She shall be brought out into the congregation. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her punishment will extend to her children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_25">25&#160;</span>Her children will not take root. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her branches will bear no fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_26">26&#160;</span>She will leave her memory for a curse. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her reproach won’t be blotted out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR23_27">27&#160;</span>And those who are left behind will know that there is nothing better than the fear of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and nothing sweeter than to heed the commandments of the Lord. 
<span class="verse" id="SR23_28">28&#160;</span> <a href='#FN64' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a>  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_1">1&#160;</span>Wisdom will praise her own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will proclaim her glory in the midst of her people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_2">2&#160;</span>She will open her mouth in the congregation of the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and proclaim her glory in the presence of his power. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_3">3&#160;</span>“I came out of the mouth of the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and covered the earth as a mist. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_4">4&#160;</span>I lived in high places, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my throne is in the pillar of the cloud. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_5">5&#160;</span>Alone I surrounded the circuit of heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>and walked in the depth of the abyss. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_6">6&#160;</span>In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in every people and nation, I obtained a possession. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_7">7&#160;</span>With all these I sought rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>In whose inheritance shall I lodge? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_8">8&#160;</span>Then the Creator of all things gave me a command. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who created me made my tent to rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and said, ‘Let your dwelling be in Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your inheritance in Israel.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_9">9&#160;</span>He created me from the beginning, before the ages. </div>
<div class='q2'>For all ages, I will not cease to exist. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_10">10&#160;</span>In the holy tabernacle, I ministered before him. </div>
<div class='q2'>So I was established in Zion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_11">11&#160;</span>In the beloved city, likewise he gave me rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>In Jerusalem was my domain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_12">12&#160;</span>I took root in a people that was honored, </div>
<div class='q2'>even in the portion of the Lord’s own inheritance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_13">13&#160;</span>I was exalted like a cedar in Lebanon, </div>
<div class='q2'>And like a cypress tree on the mountains of Hermon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_14">14&#160;</span>I was exalted like a palm tree on the sea shore, </div>
<div class='q2'>like rose bushes in Jericho, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a fair olive tree in the plain. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was exalted like a plane tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_15">15&#160;</span>Like cinnamon and aspalathus, I have given a scent to perfumes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Like choice myrrh, I spread abroad a pleasant fragrance, </div>
<div class='q2'>like<a href='#FN65' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> galbanum, onycha, stacte, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the smell of frankincense in the tabernacle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_16">16&#160;</span>Like the terebinth, I stretched out my branches. </div>
<div class='q2'>My branches are glorious and graceful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_17">17&#160;</span>Like the vine, I put forth grace. </div>
<div class='q2'>My flowers are the fruit of glory and riches. 
<span class="verse" id="SR24_18">18&#160;</span> <a href='#FN66' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_19">19&#160;</span>“Come to me, all you who desire me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be filled with my fruits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_20">20&#160;</span>For my memory is sweeter than honey, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my inheritance than the honeycomb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_21">21&#160;</span>Those who eat me will be hungry for more. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who drink me will be thirsty for more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_22">22&#160;</span>He who obeys me will not be ashamed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who work with me will not sin.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_23">23&#160;</span>All these things are the book of the covenant of the Most High God, </div>
<div class='q2'>the law which Moses commanded us for an inheritance for the assemblies of Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="SR24_24">24&#160;</span> <a href='#FN67' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_25">25&#160;</span>It is he who makes wisdom abundant, as Pishon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as Tigris in the days of first fruits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_26">26&#160;</span>He makes understanding full as the Euphrates, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the Jordan in the days of harvest, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_27">27&#160;</span>who makes instruction shine forth as the light, </div>
<div class='q2'>as Gihon in the days of vintage. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_28">28&#160;</span>The first man didn’t know her perfectly. </div>
<div class='q2'>In like manner, the last has not explored her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_29">29&#160;</span>For her thoughts are filled from the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her counsels from the great deep. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_30">30&#160;</span>I came out as a canal stream from a river, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as an irrigation ditch into a garden. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_31">31&#160;</span>I said, “I will water my garden, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will drench my garden bed.” </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, my stream became a river, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my river became a sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_32">32&#160;</span>I will yet bring instruction to light as the morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make these things clear from far away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_33">33&#160;</span>I will continue to pour out teaching like prophecy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and leave it to all generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR24_34">34&#160;</span>See that I have not labored for myself only, </div>
<div class='q2'>but for all those who diligently seek wisdom. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR25_0'> 25</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_1">1&#160;</span>I enjoy three things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they are beautiful before the Lord and men: </div>
<div class='q2'>the agreement of kindred, </div>
<div class='q2'>the friendship of neighbors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a woman and her husband who walk together in agreement. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_2">2&#160;</span>But my soul hates three sorts of people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I am greatly offended at their life: </div>
<div class='q2'>a poor man who is arrogant, </div>
<div class='q2'>a rich man who is a liar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an old fool who is an adulterer. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_3">3&#160;</span>If you gathered nothing in your youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>how could you find anything in your old age? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_4">4&#160;</span>How beautiful a thing is judgment in the gray-haired, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for elders to know good counsel! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_5">5&#160;</span>How beautiful is the wisdom of old men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and understanding and counsel to men who are in honor! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_6">6&#160;</span>Much experience is the crown of the aged. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their glory is the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_7">7&#160;</span>There are nine things that I have thought of, and in my heart counted happy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the tenth I will utter with my tongue: </div>
<div class='q2'>a man who has joy with his children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a man who lives and sees the fall of his enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_8">8&#160;</span>Happy is he who dwells with a wife of understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who has not slipped with his tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>Aad he who has not served a man who is unworthy of him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_9">9&#160;</span>Happy is he who has found prudence, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who speaks in the ears of those who listen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_10">10&#160;</span>How great is he who has found wisdom! </div>
<div class='q2'>Yet is there none above him who fears the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_11">11&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord surpasses all things. </div>
<div class='q2'>To whom shall he who holds it be likened? 
<span class="verse" id="SR25_12">12&#160;</span> <a href='#FN68' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_13">13&#160;</span> Any wound but a wound of the heart! </div>
<div class='q2'>Any wickedness but the wickedness of a woman! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_14">14&#160;</span>Any calamity but a calamity from those who hate me! </div>
<div class='q2'>Any vengeance but the vengeance of enemies! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_15">15&#160;</span>There is no venom worse than a snake’s venom. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no wrath worse than an enemy’s wrath. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_16">16&#160;</span>I would rather dwell with a lion and a dragon </div>
<div class='q2'>than keep house with a wicked woman. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_17">17&#160;</span>The wickedness of a woman changes her appearance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and darkens her countenance like that of a bear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_18">18&#160;</span>Her husband will sit among his neighbors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and when he hears it, he sighs bitterly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_19">19&#160;</span>All malice is small compared to the malice of a woman. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let the portion of a sinner fall on her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_20">20&#160;</span> As walking up a sandy hill is to the feet of the aged, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a wife full of words to a quiet man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t be ensnared by a woman’s beauty. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t desire a woman for her beauty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_22">22&#160;</span>There is anger, impudence, and great reproach </div>
<div class='q2'>if a woman supports her husband. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_23">23&#160;</span>A wicked woman is abasement of heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>sadness of countenance, and a wounded heart. </div>
<div class='q'>A woman who won’t make her husband happy </div>
<div class='q2'>is like hands that hang down, and weak knees. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_24">24&#160;</span>The beginning of sin came from a woman. </div>
<div class='q2'>Because of her, we all die. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t give water an outlet, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t give a wicked woman freedom of speech. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR25_26">26&#160;</span>If she doesn’t go as you direct, </div>
<div class='q2'>cut her away from your flesh.<a href='#FN69' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_1">1&#160;</span>Happy is the husband of a good wife. </div>
<div class='q2'>The number of his days will be doubled. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_2">2&#160;</span>A faithful wife gives joy to her husband. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will fulfill his years in peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_3">3&#160;</span>A good wife is a great gift. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will be given to those who fear the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_4">4&#160;</span>Whether a man is rich or poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>a good heart makes a cheerful face at all times. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_5">5&#160;</span>Of three things my heart was afraid, </div>
<div class='q2'>and concerning the fourth<a href='#FN70' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> kind I made supplication: </div>
<div class='q2'>The slander of a city, the assembly of a mob, and a false accusation. </div>
<div class='q2'>All these are more grievous than death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_6">6&#160;</span>A grief of heart and sorrow is a woman who is jealous of another woman. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her tongue-lashing makes it known to all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_7">7&#160;</span>A wicked woman is like a chafing yoke. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who takes hold of her is like one who grasps a scorpion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_8">8&#160;</span>A drunken woman causes great wrath. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will not cover her own shame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_9">9&#160;</span>The whoredom of a woman is in the lifting up of her eyes; </div>
<div class='q2'>it will be known by her eyelids. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_10">10&#160;</span>Keep strict watch on a headstrong daughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest she find liberty for herself, and use it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_11">11&#160;</span>Watch out for an impudent eye, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be surprised if it sins against you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_12">12&#160;</span>She will open her mouth like a thirsty traveller, </div>
<div class='q2'>and drink from every water that is near. </div>
<div class='q'>She will sit down at every post, </div>
<div class='q2'>and open her quiver to any arrow. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_13">13&#160;</span>The grace of a wife will delight her husband. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her knowledge will strengthen <a href='#FN71' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> his bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_14">14&#160;</span>A silent woman is a gift of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is nothing worth so much as a well-instructed soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_15">15&#160;</span>A modest woman is grace upon grace. </div>
<div class='q2'>There are no scales that can weigh the value of a self-controlled soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_16">16&#160;</span>As the sun when it arises in the highest places of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is the beauty of a good wife in her well-organized home. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_17">17&#160;</span>As the lamp that shines upon the holy lampstand, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is the beauty of the face on a well-proportioned body. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_18">18&#160;</span>As the golden pillars are upon a base of silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>so are beautiful feet with the breasts of one who is steadfast. 
<span class="verse" id="SR26_19-27">19-27&#160;</span> <a href='#FN72' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_28">28&#160;</span>For two things my heart is grieved, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for the third anger comes upon me: </div>
<div class='q2'>a warrior who suffers for poverty, </div>
<div class='q2'>men of understanding who are counted as garbage, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one who turns back from righteousness to sin— </div>
<div class='q2'>the Lord will prepare him for the sword! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR26_29">29&#160;</span>It is difficult for a merchant to keep himself from wrong doing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for a retailer to be acquitted of sin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_1">1&#160;</span>Many have sinned for profit. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who seeks to multiply wealth will turn his eye away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_2">2&#160;</span>As a nail will stick fast between the joinings of stones, </div>
<div class='q2'>so sin will thrust itself in between buying and selling. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_3">3&#160;</span>Unless a person holds on diligently to the fear of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>his house will be overthrown quickly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_4">4&#160;</span>In the shaking of a sieve, the refuse remains, </div>
<div class='q2'>so does the filth of man in his thoughts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_5">5&#160;</span>The furnace tests the potter’s vessels; </div>
<div class='q2'>so the test of a person is in his thoughts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_6">6&#160;</span>The fruit of a tree discloses its cultivation, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is the utterance of the thought of a person’s heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_7">7&#160;</span>Praise no man before you hear his thoughts, </div>
<div class='q2'>for this is how people are tested. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_8">8&#160;</span>If you follow righteousness, you will obtain it, </div>
<div class='q'>and put it on like a long robe of glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_9">9&#160;</span>Birds will return to their own kind, </div>
<div class='q2'>so truth will return to those who practice it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_10">10&#160;</span>The lion lies in wait for prey. </div>
<div class='q2'>So does sin for those who do evil. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_11">11&#160;</span>The discourse of a godly man is always wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the fool changes like the moon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_12">12&#160;</span>Limit your time among people void of understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>but persevere among the thoughtful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_13">13&#160;</span>The talk of fools is offensive. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their laughter is wantonly sinful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_14">14&#160;</span>Their talk with much swearing makes hair stand upright. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their strife makes others plug their ears. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_15">15&#160;</span>The strife of the proud leads to bloodshed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their abuse of each other is a grievous thing to hear. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_16">16&#160;</span>He who reveals secrets destroys trust, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will not find a close friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_17">17&#160;</span>Love a friend, and keep faith with him; </div>
<div class='q2'>but if you reveal his secrets, </div>
<div class='q2'>you shall not follow him; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_18">18&#160;</span>for as a man has destroyed his enemy, </div>
<div class='q2'>so you have destroyed the friendship of your neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_19">19&#160;</span>As a bird which you have released out of your hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>so you have let your neighbor go, and you will not catch him again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t pursue him, for he has gone far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has escaped like a gazelle out of the snare. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_21">21&#160;</span>For a wound may be bound up, and after abuse there may be reconciliation; </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who reveals secrets is without hope. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_22">22&#160;</span>One who winks the eye contrives evil things; </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who know him will keep their distance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_23">23&#160;</span>When you are present, he will speak sweetly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will admire your words; </div>
<div class='q2'>but afterward he will twist his speech </div>
<div class='q2'>and set a trap in your words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_24">24&#160;</span>I have hated many things, but nothing like him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord will hate him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_25">25&#160;</span>One who casts a stone straight up casts it on his own head. </div>
<div class='q2'>A deceitful blow opens wounds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_26">26&#160;</span>He who digs a pit will fall into it. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who sets a snare will be caught in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_27">27&#160;</span>He who does evil things, they will roll back upon him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will not know where they came from. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_28">28&#160;</span>Mockery and reproach are from the arrogant. </div>
<div class='q2'>Vengeance lies in wait for them like a lion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_29">29&#160;</span>Those who rejoice at the fall of the godly will be caught in a snare. </div>
<div class='q2'>Anguish will consume them before they die. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR27_30">30&#160;</span>Wrath and anger, these also are abominations. </div>
<div class='q2'>A sinner will possess them.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_1">1&#160;</span>He who takes vengeance will find vengeance from the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will surely make his sins firm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_2">2&#160;</span>Forgive your neighbor the hurt that he has done, </div>
<div class='q2'>and then your sins will be pardoned when you pray. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_3">3&#160;</span>Does anyone harbor anger against another </div>
<div class='q2'>and expect healing from the Lord? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_4">4&#160;</span>Upon a man like himself he has no mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and does he make supplication for his own sins? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_5">5&#160;</span>He being himself flesh nourishes wrath. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will make atonement for his sins? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_6">6&#160;</span>Remember your last end, and stop enmity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember corruption and death, and be true to the commandments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_7">7&#160;</span>Remember the commandments, and don’t be angry with your neighbor. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember the covenant of the Highest, and overlook ignorance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_8">8&#160;</span>Abstain from strife, and you will diminish your sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>for a passionate man will kindle strife. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_9">9&#160;</span>A man who is a sinner will trouble friends </div>
<div class='q2'>and sow discord among those who are at peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_10">10&#160;</span>As is the fuel of the fire, so will it burn; </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the stoutness of the strife is, so will it burn. </div>
<div class='q'>As is the strength of the man, so will be his wrath; </div>
<div class='q2'>and as is his wealth, so he will exalt his anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_11">11&#160;</span>A contention begun in haste kindles a fire; </div>
<div class='q2'>and hasty fighting sheds blood. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_12">12&#160;</span>If you blow on a spark, it will burn; </div>
<div class='q2'>and if you spit upon it, it will be quenched. </div>
<div class='q2'>Both of these come out of your mouth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_13">13&#160;</span>Curse the whisperer and double-tongued, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has destroyed many who were at peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_14">14&#160;</span>A slanderer has shaken many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dispersed them from nation to nation. </div>
<div class='q'>It has pulled down strong cities </div>
<div class='q2'>and overthrown the houses of great men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_15">15&#160;</span>A slanderer has cast out brave women </div>
<div class='q2'>and deprived them of their labors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_16">16&#160;</span>He who listens to it will not find rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will he live quietly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_17">17&#160;</span>The stroke of a whip makes a mark in the flesh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the stroke of a tongue will break bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_18">18&#160;</span>Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet not so many as those who have fallen because of the tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_19">19&#160;</span>Happy is he who is sheltered from it, </div>
<div class='q2'>who has not passed through its wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>who has not drawn its yoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has not been bound with its bands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_20">20&#160;</span>For its yoke is a yoke of iron, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its bands are bands of brass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_21">21&#160;</span>Its death is an evil death, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Hades is better than it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_22">22&#160;</span>It will not have rule over godly men. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will not be burned in its flame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_23">23&#160;</span>Those who forsake the Lord will fall into it. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will burn among them, and won’t be quenched. </div>
<div class='q'>It will be sent against them like a lion. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will destroy them like a leopard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_24">24&#160;</span>As you hedge your possession about with thorns, </div>
<div class='q2'>and secure your silver and your gold, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_25">25&#160;</span>so make a balance and a weight for your words, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make a door and a bar for your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR28_26">26&#160;</span>Take heed lest you slip with it, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you fall before one who lies in wait. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_1">1&#160;</span>He who shows mercy will lend to his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who strengthens him with his hand keeps the commandments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_2">2&#160;</span>Lend to your neighbor in time of his need. </div>
<div class='q2'>Repay your neighbor on time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_3">3&#160;</span>Confirm your word, and keep faith with him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and at all seasons you will find what you need. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_4">4&#160;</span>Many have considered a loan to be a windfall, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have given trouble to those who helped them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_5">5&#160;</span>Until he has received, he will kiss a man’s hands. </div>
<div class='q2'>For his neighbor’s money he will speak submissly. </div>
<div class='q'>Then when payment is due, he will prolong the time, </div>
<div class='q2'>return excuses, and complain about the season. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_6">6&#160;</span>If he prevails, the creditor will hardly receive half; </div>
<div class='q2'>And he will count it as a windfall. </div>
<div class='q'>If not, he has deprived him of his money, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he has gotten him for an enemy without cause. </div>
<div class='q'>He will pay him with cursing and railing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Instead of honor, he will pay him disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_7">7&#160;</span> <a href='#FN73' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Many on account of fraud have turned away. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are afraid of being defrauded for nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_8">8&#160;</span>However be patient with a man in poor estate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t keep him waiting for your alms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_9">9&#160;</span>Help a poor man for the commandment’s sake. </div>
<div class='q2'>According to his need don’t send him empty away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_10">10&#160;</span>Lose your money for a brother and a friend. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let it rust under a stone and be lost. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_11">11&#160;</span>Allocate your treasure according to the commandments of the Most High </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will profit you more than gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_12">12&#160;</span>Store up almsgiving in your store-chambers </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will deliver you out of all affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_13">13&#160;</span>It will fight for you against your enemy </div>
<div class='q2'>better than a mighty shield and a ponderous spear. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_14">14&#160;</span>A good man will be surety for his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has lost shame will fail him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t forget the kindness of your guarantor, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has given his life for you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_16">16&#160;</span>A sinner will waste the property of his guarantor. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_17">17&#160;</span>He who is thankless will fail him who delivered him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_18">18&#160;</span>Being surety has undone many who were prospering </div>
<div class='q2'>and shaken them as a wave of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>It has driven mighty men from their homes. </div>
<div class='q2'>They wandered among foreign nations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_19">19&#160;</span>A sinner who falls into suretiship and undertakes contracts for work </div>
<div class='q2'>will fall into lawsuits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_20">20&#160;</span>Help your neighbor according to your power, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be careful not to fall yourself. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_21">21&#160;</span>The essentials of life are water, bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>a garment, and a house for privacy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_22">22&#160;</span>Better is the life of a poor man under a shelter of logs </div>
<div class='q2'>than sumptuous fare in another man’s house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_23">23&#160;</span>With little or with much, be well satisfied.<a href='#FN74' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_24">24&#160;</span>It is a miserable life to go from house to house. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where you are a guest, you dare not open your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_25">25&#160;</span>You will entertain, serve drinks, and have no thanks. </div>
<div class='q2'>In addition to this, you will hear bitter words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_26">26&#160;</span>“Come here, you sojourner, set a table, </div>
<div class='q2'>and if you have anything in your hand, feed me with it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_27">27&#160;</span>“Leave, you sojourner, for an honored guest is here. </div>
<div class='q2'>My brother has come to be my guest. I need my house.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR29_28">28&#160;</span>These things are grievous to a man of understanding: </div>
<div class='q2'>The scolding about lodging and the insults of creditors. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR30_0'> 30</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_1">1&#160;</span>He who loves his son will continue to lay stripes upon him, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may have joy from him in the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_2">2&#160;</span>He who chastises his son will have profit from him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will brag about him among his acquaintances. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_3">3&#160;</span>He who teaches his son will provoke his enemy to jealousy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Before friends, he will rejoice in him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_4">4&#160;</span>His father dies, and is as though he had not died; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has left one behind him like himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_5">5&#160;</span>In his life, he saw his son and rejoiced. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he died, it was without regret. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_6">6&#160;</span>He left behind him an avenger against his enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one to repay kindness to his friends. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_7">7&#160;</span>He who makes too much of his son will bind up his wounds. </div>
<div class='q2'>His heart will be troubled at every cry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_8">8&#160;</span>An unbroken horse becomes stubborn. </div>
<div class='q2'>An unrestrained son becomes headstrong. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_9">9&#160;</span>Pamper your child, and he will make you afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>Play with him, and he will grieve you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t laugh with him, lest you have sorrow with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you gnash your teeth in the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_11">11&#160;</span>Give him no liberty in his youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t ignore his follies.<a href='#FN75' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_12">12&#160;</span> <a href='#FN76' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Bow down his neck in his youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beat him on the sides while he is a child, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he become stubborn, and be disobedient to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there be sorrow to your soul.<a href='#FN77' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_13">13&#160;</span>Chastise your son, and give him work, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest his shameless behavior be an offense to you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_14">14&#160;</span>Better is a poor man who is healthy and fit, </div>
<div class='q2'>than a rich man who is afflicted in his body. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_15">15&#160;</span>Health and fitness are better than all gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a strong body better than wealth without measure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_16">16&#160;</span>There is no wealth better than health of body. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no gladness above the joy of the heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_17">17&#160;</span>Death is better than a bitter life, </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN78' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> and<a href='#FN79' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> eternal rest than a continual sickness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_18">18&#160;</span>Good things poured out upon a mouth that is closed </div>
<div class='q2'>are like food offerings laid upon a grave. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_19">19&#160;</span>What does an offering profit an idol? </div>
<div class='q2'>For it can’t eat or smell. </div>
<div class='q'>So is he who is punished by the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_20">20&#160;</span>seeing with his eyes and groaning, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a eunuch embracing a virgin and groaning. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t give your soul to sorrow. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t afflict yourself deliberately. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_22">22&#160;</span>Gladness of heart is the life of a man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Cheerfulness of a man lengthens his days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_23">23&#160;</span>Love your own soul, and comfort your heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remove sorrow far from you, </div>
<div class='q2'>for sorrow has destroyed many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no profit in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_24">24&#160;</span>Envy and wrath shorten life. </div>
<div class='q2'>Anxiety brings old age before its time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR30_25">25&#160;</span>Those who are cheerful and merry </div>
<div class='q2'>will benefit from their food.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_1">1&#160;</span>Wakefulness that comes from riches consumes the flesh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and anxiety about it takes away sleep. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_2">2&#160;</span>Wakeful anxiety will crave slumber. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN80' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> In a severe disease, sleep will be broken. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_3">3&#160;</span>A rich man toils in gathering money together. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he rests, he is filled with his good things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_4">4&#160;</span>A poor man toils in lack of substance. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he rests, he becomes needy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_5">5&#160;</span>He who loves gold won’t be justified. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who follows destruction will himself have his fill of it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_6">6&#160;</span>Many have been given over to ruin for the sake of gold. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their destruction meets them face to face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_7">7&#160;</span>It is a stumbling block to those who sacrifice to it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Every fool will be taken by it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_8">8&#160;</span>Blessed is the rich person who is found blameless, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who doesn’t go after gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_9">9&#160;</span>Who is he, that we may call him blessed? </div>
<div class='q2'>For he has done wonderful things among his people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_10">10&#160;</span>Who has been tried by it, and found perfect? </div>
<div class='q2'>Then let him boast. </div>
<div class='q'>Who has had the power to transgress, and has not transgressed? </div>
<div class='q2'>And to do evil, and has not done it? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_11">11&#160;</span>His prosperity will be made sure. </div>
<div class='q2'>The congregation will proclaim his alms. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_12">12&#160;</span>Do you sit at a great table? Don’t be greedy there. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t say, “There is a lot of food on it!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_13">13&#160;</span>Remember that a greedy eye is a wicked thing. </div>
<div class='q2'>What has been created more greedy than an eye? </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore it sheds tears from every face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t stretch your hand wherever it looks. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t thrust yourself with it into the dish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_15">15&#160;</span>Consider your neighbor’s feelings by your own. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be discreet in every point. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_16">16&#160;</span>Eat like a human being those things which are set before you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t eat greedily, lest you be hated. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_17">17&#160;</span>Be first to stop for manners’ sake. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be insatiable, lest you offend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_18">18&#160;</span>And if you sit among many, </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t reach out your hand before them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_19">19&#160;</span>How sufficient to a well-mannered man is a very little. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t breathe heavily in his bed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_20">20&#160;</span>Healthy sleep comes from moderate eating. </div>
<div class='q2'>He rises early, and his wits are with him. </div>
<div class='q'>The pain of wakefulness, colic, </div>
<div class='q2'>and griping are with an insatiable man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_21">21&#160;</span>And if you have been forced to eat, </div>
<div class='q2'>rise up in the middle of it, and you shall have rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_22">22&#160;</span>Hear me, my son, and don’t despise me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the end you will appreciate my words. </div>
<div class='q'>In all your works be skillful, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no disease will come to you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_23">23&#160;</span>People bless him who is liberal with his food. </div>
<div class='q2'>The testimony of his excellence will be believed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_24">24&#160;</span>The city will murmer at him who is a stingy with his food. </div>
<div class='q2'>The testimony of his stinginess will be accurate. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t show not yourself valiant in wine, </div>
<div class='q2'>for wine has destroyed many. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_26">26&#160;</span>The furnace tests the temper of steel by dipping; </div>
<div class='q2'>so does wine test hearts in the quarreling of the proud. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_27">27&#160;</span>Wine is as good as life to men, </div>
<div class='q2'>if you drink it in moderation. </div>
<div class='q'>What life is there to a man who is without wine? </div>
<div class='q2'>It has been created to make men glad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_28">28&#160;</span>Wine drunk in season and in moderation </div>
<div class='q2'>is joy of heart and gladness of soul: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_29">29&#160;</span>Wine drunk excessively is bitterness of soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>with provocation and conflict. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_30">30&#160;</span>Drunkenness increases the rage of a fool to his hurt. </div>
<div class='q2'>It diminishes strength and adds wounds. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR31_31">31&#160;</span>Don’t rebuke your neighbor at a banquet of wine. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t despise him in his mirth. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t speak a word of reproach to him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t distress him by making demands of him.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_1">1&#160;</span>Have they made you ruler of a feast? </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be lifted up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be among them as one of them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Take care of them first, and then sit down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_2">2&#160;</span>And when you have done all your duties, take your place, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be gladdened on their account, </div>
<div class='q2'>and receive a wreath for your good service. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_3">3&#160;</span>Speak, you who are older, for it’s your right, but with sound knowledge; </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t interrupt the music. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t pour out talk where there is a performance of music. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t display your wisdom at the wrong time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_5">5&#160;</span> As a ruby signet in a setting of gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a music concert at a wine banquet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_6">6&#160;</span>As an emerald signet in a work of gold, </div>
<div class='q'>so is musical melody with pleasant wine. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_7">7&#160;</span>Speak, young man, if you are obliged to, </div>
<div class='q2'>but no more than twice, and only if asked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_8">8&#160;</span>Sum up your speech, many things in few words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be as one who knows and yet holds his tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_9">9&#160;</span> When among great men, don’t behave as their equal. </div>
<div class='q2'>When another is speaking, don’t babble. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_10">10&#160;</span>Lightning speeds before thunder. </div>
<div class='q2'>Approval goes before a modesty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_11">11&#160;</span>Rise up in good time, and don’t be last. </div>
<div class='q2'>Go home quickly and don’t loiter </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_12">12&#160;</span>Amuse yourself there and do what is in your heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t sin by proud speech. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_13">13&#160;</span>For these things bless your Maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>who gives you to drink freely of his good things. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_14">14&#160;</span>He who fears the Lord will receive discipline. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who seek him early will find favor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_15">15&#160;</span>He who seeks the law shall be filled with it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the hypocrite will stumble at it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_16">16&#160;</span>Those who fear the Lord will find true judgment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will kindle righteous acts like a light. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_17">17&#160;</span>A sinful man shuns reproof, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will find a judgment according to his will. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_18">18&#160;</span>A sensible person won’t neglect a thought. </div>
<div class='q2'>An insolent and proud man won’t crouch in fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>even after he has done a thing by himself without counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_19">19&#160;</span>Do nothing without counsel, </div>
<div class='q2'>but when you have acted, don’t regret it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t go in a way of conflict. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t stumble in stony places. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t be overconfident on a smooth road. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_22">22&#160;</span>Beware of your own children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_23">23&#160;</span>In every work guard your own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>for this is the keeping of the commandments. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR32_24">24&#160;</span>He who believes the law gives heed to the commandment. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who trusts in the Lord will suffer no loss.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_1">1&#160;</span>No evil will happen to him who fears the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in trials once and again he will deliver him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_2">2&#160;</span>A wise man will not hate the law, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is a hypocrite about it is like a boat in a storm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_3">3&#160;</span>A man of understanding will put his trust in the law. </div>
<div class='q2'>And the law is faithful to him, as when one asks a divine oracle. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_4">4&#160;</span>Prepare your speech, and so you will be heard. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bind up instruction, and make your answer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_5">5&#160;</span>The heart of a fool is like a cartwheel. </div>
<div class='q2'>His thoughts are like a rolling axle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_6">6&#160;</span>A stallion horse is like a mocking friend. </div>
<div class='q2'>He neighs under every one who sits upon him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_7">7&#160;</span>Why does one day excel another, </div>
<div class='q2'>when all the light of every day in the year is from the sun? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_8">8&#160;</span>They were distinguished by the Lord’s knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he varied seasons and feasts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_9">9&#160;</span>Some of them he exalted and hallowed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and some of them he has made ordinary days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_10">10&#160;</span>And all men are from the ground. </div>
<div class='q2'>Adam was created from dust. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_11">11&#160;</span>In the abundance of his knowledge the Lord distinguished them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made their ways different. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_12">12&#160;</span>Some of them he blessed and exalted, </div>
<div class='q2'>and some of them he made holy and brought near to himself. </div>
<div class='q'>Some of them he cursed and brought low, </div>
<div class='q2'>and overthrew them from their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_13">13&#160;</span>As the clay of the potter in his hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>all his ways are according to his good pleasure, </div>
<div class='q'>so men are in the hand of him who made them, </div>
<div class='q2'>to render to them according to his judgment. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_14">14&#160;</span>Good is the opposite of evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and life is the opposite of death; </div>
<div class='q2'>so<a href='#FN81' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the sinner is the opposite of the godly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_15">15&#160;</span>Look upon all the works of the Most High like this, </div>
<div class='q2'>they come in pairs, one against another. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_16">16&#160;</span>I was the last on watch, </div>
<div class='q2'>like one who gleans after the grape gatherers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_17">17&#160;</span>By the Lord’s blessing I arrived before them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and filled my winepress like one who gathers grapes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_18">18&#160;</span>Consider that I labored not for myself alone, </div>
<div class='q2'>but for all those who seek instruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_19">19&#160;</span>Hear me, you great men of the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and listen with your ears, you rulers of the congregation. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_20">20&#160;</span>To son and wife, to brother and friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t give power over yourself while you live, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t give your goods to another, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you regret it and must ask for them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_21">21&#160;</span>While you still live and breath is in you, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t give yourself over to anybody. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_22">22&#160;</span>For it is better that your children should ask from you </div>
<div class='q2'>than that you should look to the hand of your children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_23">23&#160;</span>Excel in all your works. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t bring a stain on your honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_24">24&#160;</span>In the day that you end the days of your life, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the time of death, distribute your inheritance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_25">25&#160;</span>Fodder, a stick, and burdens are for a donkey. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bread, discipline, and work are for a servant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_26">26&#160;</span>Set your slave to work, and you will find rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>Leave his hands idle, and he will seek liberty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_27">27&#160;</span>Yoke and thong will bow the neck. </div>
<div class='q2'>For an evil slave there are racks and tortures. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_28">28&#160;</span>Send him to labor, that he not be idle, </div>
<div class='q2'>for idleness teaches much mischief. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_29">29&#160;</span>Set him to work, as is fit for him. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he doesn’t obey, make his fetters heavy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t be excessive toward any. </div>
<div class='q2'>Do nothing unjust. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_31">31&#160;</span>If you have a slave, treat him like yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you have bought him with blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_32">32&#160;</span>If you have a slave, treat him like yourself. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN82' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> For like your own soul, you will need him. </div>
<div class='q'>If you treat him ill, and he departs and runs away, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR33_33">33&#160;</span>which way will you go to seek him? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_1">1&#160;</span>Vain and false hopes are for a man void of understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>Dreams give wings to fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_2">2&#160;</span>As one who grasps at a shadow and follows after the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who sets his mind on dreams. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_3">3&#160;</span>The vision of dreams is a reflection, </div>
<div class='q2'>the likeness of a face near a face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_4">4&#160;</span>From an unclean thing what can be cleansed? </div>
<div class='q2'>From that which is false what can be true? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_5">5&#160;</span>Divinations, and soothsayings, and dreams, are vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>The heart has fantasies like a woman in labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_6">6&#160;</span>If they are not sent in a visitation from the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t give your heart to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_7">7&#160;</span>For dreams have led many astray. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have failed by putting their hope in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_8">8&#160;</span>Without lying the law will be fulfilled. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wisdom is complete in a faithful mouth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_9">9&#160;</span>A well-instructed man knows many things. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has much experience will declare understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_10">10&#160;</span>He who has no experience knows few things. </div>
<div class='q2'>But he who has traveled increases cleverness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_11">11&#160;</span>I have seen many things in my travels. </div>
<div class='q2'>My understanding is more than my words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_12">12&#160;</span>I was often in danger even to death. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was preserved because of these experiences. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_13">13&#160;</span>The spirit of those who fear the Lord will live, </div>
<div class='q2'>for their hope is in him who saves them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_14">14&#160;</span>Whoever fears the Lord won’t be afraid, and won’t be a coward, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he is his hope. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_15">15&#160;</span>Blessed is the soul of him who fears the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>To whom does he give heed? Who is his support? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_16">16&#160;</span>The eyes of the Lord are on those who love him, </div>
<div class='q2'>a mighty protection and strong support, </div>
<div class='q2'>a cover from the hot blast, a shade from the noonday sun, </div>
<div class='q2'>a guard from stumbling, and a help from falling. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_17">17&#160;</span>He raises up the soul, and enlightens the eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gives health, life, and blessing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_18">18&#160;</span>He who sacrifices a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is made in mockery. </div>
<div class='q2'>The mockeries of wicked men are not acceptable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_19">19&#160;</span>The Most High has no pleasure in the offerings of the ungodly, </div>
<div class='q2'>Neither is he pacified for sins by the multitude of sacrifices. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_20">20&#160;</span>Like one who kills a son before his father’s eyes </div>
<div class='q2'>is he who brings a sacrifice from the goods of the poor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_21">21&#160;</span>The bread of the needy is the life of the poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who deprives him of it is a man of blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_22">22&#160;</span>Like one who murders his neighbor is he who takes away his living. </div>
<div class='q2'>Like a shedder of blood is he who deprives a hireling of his hire. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_23">23&#160;</span>When one builds, and another pulls down, </div>
<div class='q2'>what profit do they have but toil? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_24">24&#160;</span>When one prays, and another curses, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose voice will the Lord listen to? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_25">25&#160;</span>He who washes himself after touching a dead body, and touches it again, </div>
<div class='q2'>what does he gain by his washing? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR34_26">26&#160;</span>Even so a man fasting for his sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>and going again, and doing the same, </div>
<div class='q2'>who will listen to his prayer? </div>
<div class='q2'>What profit does he have in his humiliation? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_1">1&#160;</span>He who keeps the law multiplies offerings. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who heeds the commandments sacrifices a peace offering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_2">2&#160;</span>He who returns a kindness offers fine flour. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who gives alms sacrifices a thank offering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_3">3&#160;</span>To depart from wickedness pleases the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>To depart from unrighteousness is an atoning sacrifice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_4">4&#160;</span>See that you don’t appear in the presence of the Lord empty. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_5">5&#160;</span>For all these things are done because of the commandment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_6">6&#160;</span>The offering of the righteous enriches the altar. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sweet fragrance of it is before the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_7">7&#160;</span>The sacrifice of a righteous man is acceptable. </div>
<div class='q2'>It won’t be forgotten. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_8">8&#160;</span>Glorify the Lord with generosity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t reduce the first fruits of your hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_9">9&#160;</span>In every gift show a cheerful countenance, </div>
<div class='q'>And dedicate your tithe with gladness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_10">10&#160;</span>Give to the Most High according as he has given. </div>
<div class='q2'>As your hand has found, give generously. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_11">11&#160;</span>For the Lord repays, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will repay you sevenfold. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t plan to bribe him with gifts, for he will not receive them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t set your mind on an unrighteous sacrifice, </div>
<div class='q2'>For the Lord is the judge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with him is no respect of persons. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_13">13&#160;</span>He won’t accept any person against a poor man. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will listen to the prayer of him who is wronged. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_14">14&#160;</span>He will in no way despise the supplication of the fatherless </div>
<div class='q2'>or the widow, when she pours out her tale. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t the tears of the widow run down her cheek? </div>
<div class='q2'>Isn’t her cry against him who has caused them to fall? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_16">16&#160;</span>He who serves God according to his good pleasure will be accepted. </div>
<div class='q2'>His supplication will reach to the clouds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_17">17&#160;</span>The prayer of the humble pierces the clouds. </div>
<div class='q2'>until it comes near, he will not be comforted. </div>
<div class='q'>He won’t depart until the Most High visits </div>
<div class='q2'>and he judges righteously and executes judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_18">18&#160;</span>And the Lord will not be slack, neither will he be patient toward them, </div>
<div class='q2'>until he has crushed the loins of the unmerciful. </div>
<div class='q'>He will repay vengeance to the heathen </div>
<div class='q2'>until he has taken away the multitude of the arrogant </div>
<div class='q2'>and broken in pieces the sceptres of the unrighteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_19">19&#160;</span>until he has rendered to every man according to his deeds, </div>
<div class='q2'>and repaid the works of men according to their plans, </div>
<div class='q2'>until he has judged the cause of his people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will make them rejoice in his mercy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR35_20">20&#160;</span>Mercy is as welcome in the time of his affliction, </div>
<div class='q2'>like clouds of rain in the time of drought. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR36_0'> 36</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_1">1&#160;</span>Have mercy upon us, O Lord the God of all, and look at us with favor; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_2">2&#160;</span>and send your fear upon all the nations.<a href='#FN83' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_3">3&#160;</span>Lift up your hand against the foreign nations </div>
<div class='q2'>and let them see your mighty power. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_4">4&#160;</span>As you showed your holiness in us before them, </div>
<div class='q2'>so be magnified in them before us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_5">5&#160;</span>Let them know you, as we also have known you, </div>
<div class='q2'>that there is no God but only you, O God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_6">6&#160;</span>Show new signs, and work various wonders. </div>
<div class='q2'>Glorify your hand and your right arm.<a href='#FN84' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_7">7&#160;</span>Raise up indignation and pour out wrath. </div>
<div class='q2'>Take away the adversary and destroy the enemy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_8">8&#160;</span>Hasten the time and remember your oath. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let them declare your mighty works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_9">9&#160;</span>Let him who escapes be devoured by raging fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>May those who harm your people find destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_10">10&#160;</span>Crush the heads of the rulers of the enemies </div>
<div class='q2'>who say, “There is no one but ourselves.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_11">11&#160;</span>Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and<a href='#FN85' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> take them for your inheritance, as from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_12">12&#160;</span>O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is called by your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and upon Israel, whom you likened to a firstborn. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_13">13&#160;</span>Have compassion upon the city of your sanctuary, </div>
<div class='q2'>Jerusalem, the place of your rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_14">14&#160;</span>Fill Zion. Exalt your oracles </div>
<div class='q2'>and fill your people with your glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_15">15&#160;</span>Give testimony to those who were your creatures in the beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fulfill the prophecies that have been spoken in your name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_16">16&#160;</span>Reward those who wait for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and men will put their trust in your prophets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_17">17&#160;</span>Listen, O Lord, to the prayer of your servants, </div>
<div class='q2'>according to the blessing of Aaron concerning your people; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all those who are on the earth will know </div>
<div class='q2'>that you are the Lord, the<a href='#FN86' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> eternal God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_18">18&#160;</span>The belly will eat any food, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one food is better than another. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_19">19&#160;</span>The mouth tastes meats taken in hunting, </div>
<div class='q2'>so does an understanding heart detect false speech. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_20">20&#160;</span>A contrary heart will cause heaviness. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man of experience will pay him back. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_21">21&#160;</span>A woman will receive any man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one daughter is better than another. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_22">22&#160;</span>The beauty of a woman cheers the countenance. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man desires nothing more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_23">23&#160;</span>If kindness and humility are on her tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>her husband is not like other sons of men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_24">24&#160;</span>He who gets a wife gets his richest treasure, </div>
<div class='q2'>a help meet for him and a pillar of support. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_25">25&#160;</span>Where no hedge is, the property will be plundered. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has no wife will mourn as he wanders. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR36_26">26&#160;</span>For who would trust a nimble robber who skips from city to city? </div>
<div class='q2'>Even so, who would trust a man who has no nest, and lodges wherever he finds himself at nightfall? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_1">1&#160;</span>Every friend will say, “I also am his friend”; </div>
<div class='q2'>but there is a friend which is only a friend in name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_2">2&#160;</span>Isn’t there a grief in it even to death </div>
<div class='q2'>when a companion and friend is turned into an enemy? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_3">3&#160;</span>O wicked imagination, why were you formed </div>
<div class='q2'>to cover the dry land with deceit? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_4">4&#160;</span>There is a companion who rejoices in the gladness of a friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in time of affliction will be against him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_5">5&#160;</span>There is a companion who for the belly’s sake labors with his friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet in the face of battle will carry his buckler. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t forget a friend in your soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be unmindful of him in your riches. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_7">7&#160;</span>Every counselor extols counsel, </div>
<div class='q2'>but some give counsel in their own interest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_8">8&#160;</span>Let your soul beware of a counselor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and know in advance what is his interest </div>
<div class='q2'>(for he will take counsel for himself), </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he cast the lot against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_9">9&#160;</span>and say to you, “Your way is good.” </div>
<div class='q2'>Then he will stand near you, to see what will happen to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t take counsel with one who looks askance at you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hide your counsel from those who are jealous of you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_11">11&#160;</span>Don’t consult with a woman about her rival, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a coward about war, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a merchant about business, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a buyer about selling, </div>
<div class='q2'>with an envious man about thankfulness, </div>
<div class='q2'>with an unmerciful man about kindliness, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a sluggard about any kind of work, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a hireling in your house about finishing his work, </div>
<div class='q2'>or with an idle servant about much business. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pay no attention to these in any matter of counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_12">12&#160;</span>But rather be continually with a godly man, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom you know to be a keeper of the commandments, </div>
<div class='q2'>who in his soul is as your own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who will grieve with you, if you fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_13">13&#160;</span>Make the counsel of your heart stand, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there is no one more faithful to you than it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_14">14&#160;</span>For a man’s soul is sometimes inclined to inform him </div>
<div class='q2'>better than seven watchmen who sit on high on a watch-tower. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_15">15&#160;</span>Above all this ask the Most High </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may direct your way in truth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_16">16&#160;</span>Let reason be the beginning of every work. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let counsel go before every action. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_17">17&#160;</span>As a token of the changing of the heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_18">18&#160;</span>four kinds of things rise up: </div>
<div class='q2'>good and evil, life and death. </div>
<div class='q2'>That which rules over them continually is the tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_19">19&#160;</span>There is one who is clever and the instructor of many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and yet is unprofitable to his own soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_20">20&#160;</span>There is one who is subtle in words, and is hated. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be destitute of all food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_21">21&#160;</span>For grace was not given to him from the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he is deprived of all wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_22">22&#160;</span>There is one who is wise to his own soul; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fruits of his understanding are trustworthy in the mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_23">23&#160;</span>A wise man will instruct his own people. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fruits of his understanding are trustworthy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_24">24&#160;</span>A wise man will be filled with blessing. </div>
<div class='q2'>All those who see him will call him happy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_25">25&#160;</span>The life of a man is counted by days. </div>
<div class='q2'>The days of Israel are innumerable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_26">26&#160;</span>The wise man will inherit confidence among his people. </div>
<div class='q2'>His name will live forever. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_27">27&#160;</span>My son, test your soul in your life. </div>
<div class='q2'>See what is evil for it, and don’t give in to it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_28">28&#160;</span>For not all things are profitable for all men. </div>
<div class='q2'>Not every soul has pleasure in everything. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t be insatiable in any luxury. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be greedy in the things that you eat. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_30">30&#160;</span>For overeating brings disease, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gluttony causes nausea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR37_31">31&#160;</span>Because of gluttony, many have perished, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who takes heed shall prolong his life. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR38_0'> 38</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_1">1&#160;</span>Honor a physician according to your need with the honors due to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for truly the Lord has created him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_2">2&#160;</span>For healing comes from the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he shall receive a gift from the king. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_3">3&#160;</span>The skill of the physician will lift up his head. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be admired in the sight of great men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_4">4&#160;</span>The Lord created medicines out of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>A prudent man will not despise them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_5">5&#160;</span>Wasn’t water made sweet with wood, </div>
<div class='q3'>that its power might be known? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_6">6&#160;</span>He gave men skill </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might be glorified in his marvelous works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_7">7&#160;</span>With them he heals </div>
<div class='q2'>and takes away pain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_8">8&#160;</span>With these, the pharmacist makes a mixture. </div>
<div class='q2'>God’s works won’t be brought to an end. </div>
<div class='q2'>From him, peace is upon the face of the earth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_9">9&#160;</span>My son, in your sickness don’t be negligent, </div>
<div class='q2'>but pray to the Lord, and he will heal you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_10">10&#160;</span>Put away wrong doing, and direct your hands in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Cleanse your heart from all sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_11">11&#160;</span>Give a sweet savor and a memorial of fine flour, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pour oil on your offering, according to your means. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_12">12&#160;</span>Then give place to the physician, for truly the Lord has created him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let him leave you, for you need him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_13">13&#160;</span>There is a time when in recovery is in their hands. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_14">14&#160;</span>For they also shall ask the Lord </div>
<div class='q2'>to prosper them in diagnosis and in healing for the maintenance of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_15">15&#160;</span>He who sins before his Maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>let him fall into the hands of the physician. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_16">16&#160;</span>My son, let your tears fall over the dead, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as one who suffers grievously, begin lamentation. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wind up his body with due honor. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t neglect his burial. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_17">17&#160;</span>Make bitter weeping and make passionate wailing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let your mourning be according to his merit, </div>
<div class='q2'>for one day or two, lest you be spoken evil of; </div>
<div class='q2'>and so be comforted for your sorrow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_18">18&#160;</span>For from sorrow comes death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sorrow of heart saps one’s strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_19">19&#160;</span>In calamity, sorrow also remains. </div>
<div class='q2'>A poor man’s life is grievous to the heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t give your heart to sorrow. </div>
<div class='q2'>Put it away, remembering the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_21">21&#160;</span>Don’t forget it, for there is no returning again. </div>
<div class='q2'>You do him no good, and you would harm yourself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_22">22&#160;</span>Remember his end, for so also will yours be: </div>
<div class='q2'>yesterday for me, and today for you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_23">23&#160;</span>When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be comforted for him when his spirit departs from him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_24">24&#160;</span>The wisdom of the scribe comes by the opportunity of leisure. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has little business can become wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_25">25&#160;</span>How could he become wise who holds the plow, </div>
<div class='q2'>who glories in the shaft of the goad, </div>
<div class='q2'>who drives oxen and is occupied in their labors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who mostly talks about bulls? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_26">26&#160;</span>He will set his heart upon turning his furrows. </div>
<div class='q2'>His lack of sleep is to give his heifers their fodder. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_27">27&#160;</span>So is every craftsman and master artisan </div>
<div class='q2'>who passes his time by night as by day, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who cut engravings of signets. </div>
<div class='q'>His diligence is to make great variety. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sets his heart to preserve likeness in his portraiture, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is careful to finish his work. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_28">28&#160;</span>So too is the smith sitting by the anvil </div>
<div class='q2'>and considering the unwrought iron. </div>
<div class='q'>The smoke of the fire will waste his flesh. </div>
<div class='q2'>He toils in the heat of the furnace. </div>
<div class='q'>The noise of the hammer deafens his ear. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eyes are upon the pattern of the object. </div>
<div class='q'>He will set his heart upon perfecting his works. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be careful to adorn them perfectly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_29">29&#160;</span>So is the potter sitting at his work </div>
<div class='q2'>and turning the wheel around with his feet, </div>
<div class='q2'>who is always anxiously set at his work. </div>
<div class='q2'>He produces his handiwork in quantity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_30">30&#160;</span>He will fashion the clay with his arm </div>
<div class='q2'>and will bend its strength in front of his feet. </div>
<div class='q'>He will apply his heart to finish the glazing. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be careful to clean the kiln. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_31">31&#160;</span>All these put their trust in their hands. </div>
<div class='q2'>Each becomes skillful in his own work. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_32">32&#160;</span>Without these no city would be inhabited. </div>
<div class='q2'>Men wouldn’t reside as foreigners or walk up and down there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_33">33&#160;</span> <a href='#FN87' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> They won’t be sought for in the council of the people. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t mount on high in the assembly. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t sit on the seat of the judge. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t understand the covenant of judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>Neither will they declare instruction and judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t be found where parables are. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR38_34">34&#160;</span>But they will maintain the fabric of the age. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their prayer is in the handiwork of their craft. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_1">1&#160;</span>Not so he that has applied his soul </div>
<div class='q2'>and meditates in the law of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>He will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be occupied with prophecies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_2">2&#160;</span>He will keep the sayings of the men of renown </div>
<div class='q2'>and will enter in amidst the subtleties of parables. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_3">3&#160;</span>He will seek out the hidden meaning of proverbs </div>
<div class='q2'>and be conversant in the dark sayings of parables. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_4">4&#160;</span>He will serve among great men </div>
<div class='q2'>and appear before him who rules. </div>
<div class='q'>He will travel through the land of foreign nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has learned what is good and evil among men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_5">5&#160;</span>He will apply his heart to return early to the Lord who made him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make supplication before the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will open his mouth in prayer, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will ask for pardon for his sins. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_6">6&#160;</span>If the great Lord wills, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will be filled with the spirit of understanding; </div>
<div class='q2'>he will pour forth the words of his wisdom </div>
<div class='q2'>and in prayer give thanks to the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_7">7&#160;</span>He will direct his counsel and knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will meditate in his secrets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_8">8&#160;</span>He will show the instruction which he has been taught </div>
<div class='q2'>and will glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_9">9&#160;</span>Many will commend his understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>So long as the world endures, it won’t be blotted out. </div>
<div class='q'>His memory won’t depart. </div>
<div class='q2'>His name will live from generation to generation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_10">10&#160;</span>Nations will declare his wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The congregation will proclaim his praise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_11">11&#160;</span>If he continues, he will leave a greater name than a thousand. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he finally rests, it is enough for him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_12">12&#160;</span>Yet more I will utter, which I have thought about. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am filled like the full moon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_13">13&#160;</span>Listen to me, you holy children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bud forth like a rose growing by a brook of water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_14">14&#160;</span>Give a sweet fragrance like frankincense. </div>
<div class='q2'>Put forth flowers like a lily. </div>
<div class='q2'>Scatter a sweet smell and sing a song of praise. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bless the Lord for all his works! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_15">15&#160;</span>Magnify his name </div>
<div class='q2'>and give utterance to his praise </div>
<div class='q2'>with the songs on your lips and with harps! </div>
<div class='q'>Say this when you utter his praise: </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_16">16&#160;</span>All the works of the Lord are exceedingly good, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every command will be done in its time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_17">17&#160;</span>No one can say, “What is this?” “Why is that?” </div>
<div class='q2'>for at the proper time they will all be sought out. </div>
<div class='q'>At his word, the waters stood as a heap, </div>
<div class='q2'>as did the reservoirs of water at the word of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_18">18&#160;</span>At his command all his good pleasure is fulfilled. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no one that can hinder his salvation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_19">19&#160;</span>The works of all flesh are before him. </div>
<div class='q2'>It’s impossible to be hidden from his eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_20">20&#160;</span>He sees from everlasting to everlasting. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is nothing too wonderful for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_21">21&#160;</span>No one can say, “What is this?” “Why is that?” </div>
<div class='q2'>for all things are created for their own uses. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_22">22&#160;</span>His blessing covered the dry land as a river </div>
<div class='q2'>and saturated it as a flood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_23">23&#160;</span>As he has made the waters salty, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the heathen will inherit his wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_24">24&#160;</span>His ways are plain to the holy. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are stumbling blocks to the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_25">25&#160;</span>Good things are created from the beginning for the good. </div>
<div class='q2'>So are evil things for sinners. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_26">26&#160;</span>The main things necessary for the life of man </div>
<div class='q2'>are water, fire, iron, salt, </div>
<div class='q2'>wheat flour, and honey, milk, </div>
<div class='q2'>the blood of the grape, oil, and clothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_27">27&#160;</span>All these things are for good to the godly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but for sinners, they will be turned into evils. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_28">28&#160;</span>There are winds that are created for vengeance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in their fury they lay on their scourges heavily. </div>
<div class='q'>In the time of reckoning, they pour out their strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will appease the wrath of him who made them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_29">29&#160;</span>Fire, hail, famine, and death— </div>
<div class='q2'>all these are created for vengeance— </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_30">30&#160;</span>wild beasts’ teeth, scorpions, adders, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a sword punishing the ungodly to destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_31">31&#160;</span>They will rejoice in his commandment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be made ready upon earth when needed. </div>
<div class='q2'>In their seasons, they won’t disobey his command. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_32">32&#160;</span>Therefore from the beginning I was convinced, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I thought it through and left it in writing: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_33">33&#160;</span>All the works of the Lord are good. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will supply every need in its time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_34">34&#160;</span>No one can say, “This is worse than that,” </div>
<div class='q2'>for they will all be well approved in their time. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR39_35">35&#160;</span>Now with all your hearts and voices, sing praises </div>
<div class='q2'>and bless the Lord’s name! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR40_0'> 40</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_1">1&#160;</span>Great travail is created for every man. </div>
<div class='q2'>A heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the day of their coming forth from their mother’s womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>until the day for their burial in the mother of all things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_2">2&#160;</span>The expectation of things to come, and the day of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>trouble their thoughts, and cause fear in their hearts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_3">3&#160;</span>From him who sits on a throne of glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>even to him who is humbled in earth and ashes, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_4">4&#160;</span>from him who wears purple and a crown, </div>
<div class='q2'>even to him who is clothed in burlap, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_5">5&#160;</span> there is wrath, jealousy, trouble, unrest, </div>
<div class='q2'>fear of death, anger, and strife. </div>
<div class='q'>In the time of rest upon his bed, </div>
<div class='q2'>his night sleep changes his knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_6">6&#160;</span>He gets little or no rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and afterward in his sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, </div>
<div class='q2'>he is troubled in the vision of his heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>as one who has escaped from the front of battle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_7">7&#160;</span>In the very time of his deliverance, he awakens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and marvels that the fear is nothing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_8">8&#160;</span> To all creatures, human and animal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and upon sinners sevenfold more, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_9">9&#160;</span>come death, bloodshed, strife, sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>calamities, famine, suffering, and plague. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_10">10&#160;</span>All these things were created for the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because of them the flood came. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_11">11&#160;</span>All things that are of the earth turn to the earth again. </div>
<div class='q2'>All things that are of the waters return into the sea. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_12">12&#160;</span>All bribery and injustice will be blotted out. </div>
<div class='q2'>Good faith will stand forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_13">13&#160;</span>The goods of the unjust will be dried up like a river, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a great thunder in rain will go off in noise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_14">14&#160;</span>In opening his hands, a man will be made glad; </div>
<div class='q2'>so lawbreakers will utterly fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_15">15&#160;</span>The children of the ungodly won’t grow many branches, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are as unhealthy roots on a sheer rock. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_16">16&#160;</span>The reeds by every water or river bank </div>
<div class='q2'>will be plucked up before all grass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_17">17&#160;</span>Kindness is like a garden of blessings. </div>
<div class='q2'>Almsgiving endures forever. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_18">18&#160;</span>The life of one who labors and is content will be made sweet. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who finds a treasure is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_19">19&#160;</span>Children and the building of a city establish a name. </div>
<div class='q2'>A blameless wife is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_20">20&#160;</span>Wine and music rejoice the heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>The love of wisdom is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_21">21&#160;</span>The pipe and the lute make pleasant melody. </div>
<div class='q2'>A pleasant tongue is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_22">22&#160;</span>Your eye desires grace and beauty, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the green shoots of grain more than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_23">23&#160;</span>A friend and a companion is always welcome, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a wife with her husband is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_24">24&#160;</span>Relatives and helpers are for a time of affliction, </div>
<div class='q2'>but almsgiving rescues better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_25">25&#160;</span>Gold and silver will make the foot stand sure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and counsel is esteemed better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_26">26&#160;</span>Riches and strength will lift up the heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fear of the Lord is better than both. </div>
<div class='q'>There is nothing lacking in the fear of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>In it, there is no need to seek help. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_27">27&#160;</span>The fear of the Lord is like a garden of blessing </div>
<div class='q2'>and covers a man more than any glory. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_28">28&#160;</span>My son, don’t lead a beggar’s life. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is better to die than to beg. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_29">29&#160;</span>A man who looks to the table of another, </div>
<div class='q2'>his life is not to be considered a life. </div>
<div class='q'>He will pollute his soul with another person’s food, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a wise and well-instructed person will beware of that. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR40_30">30&#160;</span>Begging will be sweet in the mouth of the shameless, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it kindles a fire in his belly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_1">1&#160;</span>O death, how bitter is the memory of you to a man who is at peace in his possessions, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the man who has nothing to distract him and has prosperity in all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who still has strength to enjoy food! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_2">2&#160;</span>O death, your sentence is acceptable to a man who is needy and who fails in strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>who is in extreme old age, is distracted about all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>is perverse, and has lost patience! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid of the sentence of death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember those who have been before you and who come after. </div>
<div class='q'>This is the sentence from the Lord over all flesh. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_4">4&#160;</span>And why do you refuse when it is the good pleasure of the Most High? </div>
<div class='q'>Whether life lasts ten, or a hundred, or a thousand years, </div>
<div class='q2'>there is no inquiry about life in Hades.<a href='#FN88' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_5">5&#160;</span>The children of sinners are abominable children </div>
<div class='q2'>and they frequent the dwellings of the ungodly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_6">6&#160;</span>The inheritance of sinners’ children will perish </div>
<div class='q2'>and with their posterity will be a perpetual disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_7">7&#160;</span>Children will complain of an ungodly father, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they suffer disgrace because of him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_8">8&#160;</span>Woe to you, ungodly men, </div>
<div class='q2'>who have forsaken the law of the Most High God!<a href='#FN89' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_9">9&#160;</span>If you are born, you will be born to a curse. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you die, a curse will be your portion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_10">10&#160;</span>All things that are of the earth will go back to the earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>so the ungodly will go from a curse to perdition. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_11">11&#160;</span>The mourning of men is about their bodies; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the evil name of sinners will be blotted out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_12">12&#160;</span>Have regard for your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>for it continues with you longer than a thousand great treasures of gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_13">13&#160;</span>A good life has its number of days, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a good name continues forever. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_14">14&#160;</span>My children, follow instruction in peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>But wisdom that is hidden and a treasure that is not seen, </div>
<div class='q2'>what benefit is in them both? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_15">15&#160;</span>Better is a man who hides his foolishness </div>
<div class='q2'>than a man who hides his wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore show respect for my words; </div>
<div class='q2'>for it is not good to retain every kind of shame. </div>
<div class='q2'>Not everything is approved by all in good faith. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_17">17&#160;</span>Be ashamed of sexual immorality before father and mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of a lie before a prince and a mighty man, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_18">18&#160;</span>of an offense before a judge and ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>of iniquity before the congregation and the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>of unjust dealing before a partner and friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_19">19&#160;</span>and of theft in the place where you sojourn. </div>
<div class='q'>Be ashamed in regard of the truth of God and his covenant, </div>
<div class='q2'>of leaning on your elbow at dinner, </div>
<div class='q2'>of contemptuous behavior in the matter of giving and taking, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_20">20&#160;</span>of silence before those who greet you, </div>
<div class='q2'>of looking at a woman who is a prostitute, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_21">21&#160;</span>of turning away your face from a kinsman, </div>
<div class='q2'>of taking away a portion or a gift, </div>
<div class='q2'>of gazing at a woman who has a husband, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_22">22&#160;</span>of meddling with his maid—and don’t come near her bed, </div>
<div class='q2'>of abusive speech to friends—and after you have given, don’t insult, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_23">23&#160;</span>of repeating and speaking what you have heard, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of revealing of secrets. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR41_24">24&#160;</span>So you will be ashamed of the right things </div>
<div class='q2'>and find favor in the sight of every man. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t be ashamed of these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t sin to save face: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_2">2&#160;</span>of the law of the Most High and his covenant, </div>
<div class='q2'>of judgment to do justice to the ungodly, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_3">3&#160;</span>of reckoning with a partner and with travellers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of a gift from the inheritance of friends, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_4">4&#160;</span>of exactness of scales and weights, </div>
<div class='q2'>of getting much or little, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_5">5&#160;</span>of bargaining dealing with merchants, </div>
<div class='q2'>of frequent correction of children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of making the back of an evil slave to bleed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_6">6&#160;</span> A seal is good where an evil wife is. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where there are many hands, lock things up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_7">7&#160;</span>Whatever you hand over, let it be by number and weight. </div>
<div class='q2'>In giving and receiving, let all be in writing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_8">8&#160;</span> Don’t be ashamed to instruct the unwise and foolish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one of extreme old age who contends with those who are young. </div>
<div class='q'>So you will be well instructed indeed </div>
<div class='q2'>and approved in the sight of every man living. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_9">9&#160;</span>A daughter is a secret cause of wakefulness to a father. </div>
<div class='q2'>Care for her takes away sleep— </div>
<div class='q2'>in her youth, lest she pass the flower of her age; </div>
<div class='q2'>when she is married, lest she should be hated; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_10">10&#160;</span>in her virginity, lest she should be defiled and be with child in her father’s house; </div>
<div class='q2'>when she has a husband, lest she should transgress; </div>
<div class='q2'>and when she is married, lest she should be barren. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_11">11&#160;</span>Keep a strict watch over a headstrong daughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest she make you a laughingstock to your enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>a byword in the city and notorious among the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shame you in public. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t gaze at every beautiful body. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t sit in the midst of women. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_13">13&#160;</span>For from garments comes a moth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from a woman comes a woman’s wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_14">14&#160;</span>Better is the wickedness of a man than a pleasant woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>a woman who puts you to shame and disgrace. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_15">15&#160;</span>I will make mention now of the works of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will declare the things that I have seen. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord’s works are in his words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_16">16&#160;</span>The sun that gives light looks at all things. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord’s work is full of his glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_17">17&#160;</span>The Lord has not given power to the saints to declare all his marvelous works, </div>
<div class='q2'>which the Almighty Lord firmly settled, </div>
<div class='q2'>that the universe might be established in his glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_18">18&#160;</span>He searches out the deep and the heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has understanding of their secrets. </div>
<div class='q'>For the Most High knows all knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sees the signs of the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_19">19&#160;</span>He declares the things that are past and the things that shall be, </div>
<div class='q2'>and reveals the traces of hidden things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_20">20&#160;</span>No thought escapes him. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is not a word hidden from him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_21">21&#160;</span>He has ordered the mighty works of his wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is from everlasting to everlasting. </div>
<div class='q'>Nothing has been added to them, nor diminished from them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He had no need of any counselor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_22">22&#160;</span>How desirable are all his works! </div>
<div class='q2'>One may see this even in a spark. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_23">23&#160;</span>All these things live and remain forever in all manner of uses. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are all obedient. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_24">24&#160;</span>All things are in pairs, one opposite the other. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has made nothing imperfect. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR42_25">25&#160;</span>One thing establishes the good things of another. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who could ever see enough of his glory? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_1">1&#160;</span>The pride of the heavenly heights is the clear sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>the appearance of heaven, in the spectacle of its glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_2">2&#160;</span>The sun, when it appears, bringing tidings as it rises, </div>
<div class='q2'>is a marvelous instrument, the work of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_3">3&#160;</span>At noon, it dries up the land. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who can stand against its burning heat? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_4">4&#160;</span>A man tending a furnace is in burning heat, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the sun three times more, burning up the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>breathing out fiery vapors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sending out bright beams, it blinds the eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_5">5&#160;</span>Great is the Lord who made it. </div>
<div class='q2'>At his word, he hastens on its course. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_6">6&#160;</span>The moon marks the changing seasons, </div>
<div class='q2'>declares times, and is a sign for the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_7">7&#160;</span>From the moon is the sign of feast days, </div>
<div class='q2'>a light that wanes when it completes its course. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_8">8&#160;</span>The month is called after its name, </div>
<div class='q2'>increasing wonderfully in its changing— </div>
<div class='q2'>an instrument of the army on high, </div>
<div class='q2'>shining in the structure of heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_9">9&#160;</span>the beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, </div>
<div class='q2'>an ornament giving light in the highest places of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_10">10&#160;</span>At the word of the Holy One, they will stand in due order. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t faint in their watches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_11">11&#160;</span>Look at the rainbow, and praise him who made it. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is exceedingly beautiful in its brightness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_12">12&#160;</span>It encircles the sky with its glorious circle. </div>
<div class='q2'>The hands of the Most High have stretched it out. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_13">13&#160;</span>By his commandment, he makes the snow fall </div>
<div class='q2'>and swiftly sends the lightnings of his judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore the storehouses are opened, </div>
<div class='q2'>and clouds fly out like birds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_15">15&#160;</span>By his mighty power, he makes the clouds strong </div>
<div class='q2'>and the hailstones are broken in pieces. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_16">16&#160;</span>At his appearing, the mountains will be shaken. </div>
<div class='q2'>At his will, the south wind will blow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_17">17&#160;</span>The voice of his thunder rebukes the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>So does the northern storm and the whirlwind. </div>
<div class='q'>Like birds flying down, he sprinkles the snow. </div>
<div class='q2'>It falls down like the lighting of locusts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_18">18&#160;</span>The eye is dazzled at the beauty of its whiteness. </div>
<div class='q2'>The heart is amazed as it falls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_19">19&#160;</span>He also pours out frost on the earth like salt. </div>
<div class='q2'>When it is freezes, it has points like thorns. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_20">20&#160;</span>The cold north wind blows </div>
<div class='q2'>and ice freezes on the water. </div>
<div class='q'>It settles on every pool of water. </div>
<div class='q2'>The water puts it on like it was a breastplate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_21">21&#160;</span>It will devour the mountains, burn up the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and consume the green grass like fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_22">22&#160;</span>A mist coming speedily heals all things. </div>
<div class='q2'>A dew coming after heat brings cheerfulness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_23">23&#160;</span>By his counsel, he has calmed the deep </div>
<div class='q2'>and planted islands in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_24">24&#160;</span>Those who sail on the sea tell of its dangers. </div>
<div class='q2'>We marvel when we hear it with our ears. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_25">25&#160;</span>There are also those strange and wondrous works in it— </div>
<div class='q2'>variety of all that has life and the huge creatures of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_26">26&#160;</span>Because of him, his messengers succeed. </div>
<div class='q2'>By his word, all things hold together. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_27">27&#160;</span>We may say many things, but couldn’t say enough. </div>
<div class='q2'>The summary of our words is, “He is everything!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_28">28&#160;</span>How could we have strength to glorify him? </div>
<div class='q2'>For he is himself the greater than all his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_29">29&#160;</span>The Lord is awesome and exceedingly great! </div>
<div class='q2'>His power is marvelous! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_30">30&#160;</span>Glorify the Lord and exalt him as much as you can! </div>
<div class='q2'>For even yet, he will surpass that. </div>
<div class='q'>When you exalt him, summon your full strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be weary, because you can’t praise him enough. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_31">31&#160;</span>Who has seen him, that he may describe him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who can magnify him as he is? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_32">32&#160;</span>Many things greater than these are hidden, </div>
<div class='q2'>for we have seen just a few of his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR43_33">33&#160;</span>For the Lord made all things. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gave wisdom to the godly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_1">1&#160;</span>Let us now praise famous men, </div>
<div class='q2'>our ancestors in their generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_2">2&#160;</span>The Lord created great glory in them— </div>
<div class='q2'>his mighty power from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_3">3&#160;</span>Some ruled in their kingdoms </div>
<div class='q2'>and were men renowned for their power, </div>
<div class='q2'>giving counsel by their understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>Some have spoken in prophecies, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_4">4&#160;</span>leaders of the people by their counsels, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by their understanding, giving instruction for the people. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their words in their instruction were wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_5">5&#160;</span>Some composed musical tunes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and set forth verses in writing, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_6">6&#160;</span>rich men endowed with ability, </div>
<div class='q2'>living peaceably in their homes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_7">7&#160;</span>All these were honored in their generations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and were outstanding in their days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_8">8&#160;</span>Some of them have left a name behind them, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that others declare their praises. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_9">9&#160;</span>But of others, there is no memory. </div>
<div class='q2'>They perished as though they had not been. </div>
<div class='q2'>They become as though they had not been born, </div>
<div class='q2'>they and their children after them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_10">10&#160;</span>But these were men of mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose righteous deeds have not been forgotten. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_11">11&#160;</span>A good inheritance remains with their offspring. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their children are within the covenant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_12">12&#160;</span>Their offspring stand fast, </div>
<div class='q2'>with their children, for their sakes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_13">13&#160;</span>Their offspring will remain forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their glory won’t be blotted out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_14">14&#160;</span>Their bodies were buried in peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their name lives to all generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_15">15&#160;</span>People will declare their wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The congregation proclaims their praise. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_16">16&#160;</span>Enoch pleased the Lord, and was taken up, </div>
<div class='q2'>an example of repentance to all generations. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_17">17&#160;</span>Noah was found perfect and righteous. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the season of wrath, he kept the race alive. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore a remnant was left on the earth </div>
<div class='q2'>when the flood came. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_18">18&#160;</span>Everlasting covenants were made with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>that all flesh should no more be blotted out by a flood. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_19">19&#160;</span>Abraham was a great father of a multitude of nations. </div>
<div class='q2'>There was none found like him in glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_20">20&#160;</span>who kept the law of the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was taken into covenant with him. </div>
<div class='q'>In his flesh he established the covenant. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he was tested, he was found faithful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore he assured him by an oath </div>
<div class='q2'>that the nations would be blessed through his offspring, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he would multiply him like the dust of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>exalt his offspring the stars, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cause them to inherit from sea to sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the Euphrates River to the utmost parts of the earth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_22">22&#160;</span>In Isaac also, he established the same assurance for Abraham his father’s sake, </div>
<div class='q2'>the blessing of all men, and the covenant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR44_23">23&#160;</span>He made it rest upon the head of Jacob. </div>
<div class='q2'>He acknowledged him in his blessings, </div>
<div class='q2'>gave to him by inheritance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and divided his portions. </div>
<div class='q2'>He distributed them among twelve tribes.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR45_0'> 45</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_1">1&#160;</span>And he brought out of him a man of mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>who found favor in the sight of all people, </div>
<div class='q2'>a man loved by God and men, even Moses, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose memory is blessed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_2">2&#160;</span>He made him equal to the glory of the saints, </div>
<div class='q2'>and magnified him in the fears of his enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_3">3&#160;</span>By his words he caused the wonders to cease. </div>
<div class='q2'>God glorified him in the sight of kings. </div>
<div class='q'>He gave him commandments for his people </div>
<div class='q2'>and showed him part of his glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_4">4&#160;</span>He sanctified him in his faithfulness and meekness. </div>
<div class='q2'>He chose him out of all people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_5">5&#160;</span>He made him to hear his voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>led him into the thick darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave him commandments face to face, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the law of life and knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might teach Jacob the covenant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel his judgments. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_6">6&#160;</span>He exalted Aaron, a holy man like Moses, </div>
<div class='q2'>even his brother, of the tribe of Levi. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_7">7&#160;</span>He established an everlasting covenant with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave him the priesthood of the people. </div>
<div class='q'>He blessed him with stateliness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dressed him in a glorious robe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_8">8&#160;</span>He clothed him in perfect splendor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and strengthened him with symbols of authority: </div>
<div class='q2'>the linen trousers, the long robe, and the ephod. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_9">9&#160;</span>And he encircled him with pomegranates; </div>
<div class='q2'>with many golden bells around him, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make a sound as he went, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make a sound that might be heard in the temple, </div>
<div class='q2'>for a reminder for the children of his people; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_10">10&#160;</span>with a holy garment, with gold, blue, and purple, the work of the embroiderer; </div>
<div class='q2'>with an oracle of judgment—Urim and Thummim; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_11">11&#160;</span>with twisted scarlet, the work of the craftsman; </div>
<div class='q2'>with precious stones engraved like a signet, in a setting of gold, the work of the jeweller, </div>
<div class='q2'>for a reminder engraved in writing, after the number of the tribes of Israel; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_12">12&#160;</span>with a crown of gold upon the mitre, having engraved on it, as on a signet, “HOLINESS”, </div>
<div class='q2'>an ornament of honor, the work of an expert, </div>
<div class='q2'>the desires of the eyes, goodly and beautiful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_13">13&#160;</span>Before him there never have been anything like it. </div>
<div class='q2'>No stranger put them on, but only his sons and his offspring perpertually. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_14">14&#160;</span>His sacrifices shall be wholly burned, </div>
<div class='q2'>twice every day continually. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_15">15&#160;</span>Moses consecrated him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and anointed him with holy oil. </div>
<div class='q'>It was an everlasting covenant with him </div>
<div class='q2'>and to his offspring, all the days of heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>to minister to the Lord, to serve as a priest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to bless his people in his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_16">16&#160;</span>He chose him out of all living </div>
<div class='q2'>to offer sacrifice to the Lord— </div>
<div class='q2'>incense, and a sweet fragrance, for a memorial, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make atonement for your people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_17">17&#160;</span>He gave to him in his commandments, </div>
<div class='q2'>authority in the covenants of judgments, </div>
<div class='q2'>to teach Jacob the testimonies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to enlighten Israel in his law. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_18">18&#160;</span>Strangers conspired against him </div>
<div class='q2'>and envied him in the wilderness: </div>
<div class='q2'>Dathan and Abiram with their company, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the congregation of Korah, with wrath and anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_19">19&#160;</span>The Lord saw it, and it displeased him. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the wrath of his anger, they were destroyed. </div>
<div class='q'>He did wonders upon them, </div>
<div class='q2'>to consume them with flaming fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_20">20&#160;</span>He added glory to Aaron, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave him a heritage. </div>
<div class='q'>He divided to him the first fruits of the increase, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prepared bread of first fruits in abundance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_21">21&#160;</span>For they eat the sacrifices of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>which he gave to him and to his offspring. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_22">22&#160;</span>However, in the land of the people, he has no inheritance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he has no portion among the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the Lord himself is your portion and inheritance. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_23">23&#160;</span>Phinehas the son of Eleazar is the third in glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>in that he was zealous in the fear of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stood fast when the people turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he made atonement for Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore, a covenant of peace was established for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he should be leader of the sanctuary and of his people, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he and his offspring should have the dignity of the priesthood forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_25">25&#160;</span>Also he made a covenant with David the son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah. </div>
<div class='q2'>The inheritance of the king is his alone from son to son. </div>
<div class='q2'>So the inheritance of Aaron is also to his seed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR45_26">26&#160;</span> May God give you wisdom in your heart </div>
<div class='q2'>to judge his people in righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>that their good things may not be abolished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that their glory may endure for all their generations. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_1">1&#160;</span>Joshua the son of Nun was valiant in war, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was the successor of Moses in prophecies. </div>
<div class='q'>He was made great according to his name </div>
<div class='q2'>for the saving of<a href='#FN90' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> God’s elect, </div>
<div class='q2'>to take vengeance on the enemies that rose up against them, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might give Israel their inheritance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_2">2&#160;</span>How was he glorified in the lifting up his hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in stretching out his sword against the cities! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_3">3&#160;</span>Who before him stood so firm? </div>
<div class='q2'>For the Lord himself brought his enemies to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_4">4&#160;</span>Didn’t the sun go back by his hand? </div>
<div class='q2'>Didn’t one day become as two? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_5">5&#160;</span>He called upon the Most High, the Mighty One, </div>
<div class='q2'>when his foes pressed in all around him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the great Lord heard him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_6">6&#160;</span>With hailstones of mighty power, </div>
<div class='q2'>he caused war to break violently upon the nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and<a href='#FN91' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> on the slope he destroyed those who resisted, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that the nations might know his armor, </div>
<div class='q2'>how he fought in the sight of the Lord; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he followed the Mighty One. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_7">7&#160;</span>Also in the time of Moses, he did a work of mercy— </div>
<div class='q2'>he and Caleb the son of Jephunneh— </div>
<div class='q2'>in that they withstood the adversary, </div>
<div class='q2'>hindered the people from sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stilled their wicked complaining. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_8">8&#160;</span>And of six hundred thousand people on foot, they two alone were preserved </div>
<div class='q2'>to bring them into their inheritance, </div>
<div class='q2'>into a land flowing with milk and honey. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_9">9&#160;</span>The Lord gave strength to Caleb, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it remained with him to his old age, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that he entered the hill country, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his offspring obtained it for an inheritance, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_10">10&#160;</span>that all the children of Israel might see that it is good to follow the Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_11">11&#160;</span>Also the judges, every one by his name, </div>
<div class='q2'>all whose hearts didn’t engage in immorality, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who didn’t turn away from the Lord— </div>
<div class='q2'>may their memory be blessed! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_12">12&#160;</span>May their bones flourish again out of their place. </div>
<div class='q2'>May the name of those who have been honored be renewed in their children. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_13">13&#160;</span>Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, loved by his Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>established a kingdom and anointed princes over his people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_14">14&#160;</span>By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Lord watched over Jacob. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_15">15&#160;</span>By his faithfulness he was proved to be a prophet. </div>
<div class='q2'>By his words he was known to be faithful in vision. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_16">16&#160;</span>When his enemies pressed on him on every side, </div>
<div class='q2'>he called upon the Lord, the Mighty One, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the offering of the suckling lamb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_17">17&#160;</span>Then the Lord thundered from heaven. </div>
<div class='q2'>He made his voice heard with a mighty sound. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_18">18&#160;</span>He utterly destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the princes of the Philistines. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_19">19&#160;</span>Before the time of his age-long sleep, </div>
<div class='q2'>he testified in the sight of the lord and his anointed, </div>
<div class='q2'>“I have not taken any man’s goods, so much as a sandal;” </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one accused him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR46_20">20&#160;</span>Even after he fell asleep, he prophesied, </div>
<div class='q2'>and showed the king his end, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, </div>
<div class='q2'>to blot out the wickedness of the people. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR47_0'> 47</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_1">1&#160;</span>And after him, Nathan rose up </div>
<div class='q2'>to prophesy in the days of David. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_2">2&#160;</span>As is the fat when it is separated from the peace offering, </div>
<div class='q2'>so was David separated from the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_3">3&#160;</span>He played with lions as with kids, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with bears as with lambs of the flock. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_4">4&#160;</span>In his youth didn’t he kill a giant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and take away reproach from the people </div>
<div class='q2'>when he lifted up his hand with a sling stone, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beat down the boasting Goliath? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_5">5&#160;</span>For he called upon the Most High Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he gave him strength in his right hand </div>
<div class='q2'>to kill a man mighty in war, </div>
<div class='q2'>to exalt the horn of his people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_6">6&#160;</span>So they glorified him for his tens of thousand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and praised him for the blessings of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>in that there a glorious diadem was given to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_7">7&#160;</span>For he destroyed the enemies on every side, </div>
<div class='q2'>and defeated the Philistines his adversaries. </div>
<div class='q2'>He broke their horn in pieces to this day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_8">8&#160;</span>In every work of his he gave thanks to the Holy One Most High with words of glory. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sang praise with his whole heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and loved him who made him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_9">9&#160;</span>He set singers before the altar, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make sweet melody by their music.<a href='#FN92' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_10">10&#160;</span>He gave beauty to the feasts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and set in order the seasons to completion </div>
<div class='q2'>while they praised his holy name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the sanctuary resounded from early morning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_11">11&#160;</span>The Lord took away his sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>and exalted his horn forever. </div>
<div class='q'>He gave him a covenant of kings, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a glorious throne in Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_12">12&#160;</span>After him a wise son rose up, </div>
<div class='q2'>who because of him lived in security. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_13">13&#160;</span>Solomon reigned in days of peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>God gave him rest all around, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might set up a house for his name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prepare a sanctuary forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_14">14&#160;</span>How wise you were made in your youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and filled as a river with understanding! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_15">15&#160;</span>Your influence covered the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you filled it with parables and riddles. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_16">16&#160;</span>Your name reached to the far away islands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you were loved for your peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_17">17&#160;</span>For your songs, proverbs, parables, </div>
<div class='q2'>and interpretations, the countries marveled at you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_18">18&#160;</span>By the name of the Lord God, </div>
<div class='q2'>who is called the God of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>you gathered gold like tin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and multiplied silver like lead. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_19">19&#160;</span>You bowed your loins to women, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in your body you were brought into subjection. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_20">20&#160;</span>You blemished your honor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and defiled your offspring, </div>
<div class='q2'>to bring wrath upon your children. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was grieved for your folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_21">21&#160;</span>because the sovereignty was divided, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a disobedient kingdom ruled out of Ephraim. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_22">22&#160;</span>But the Lord will never forsake his mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t destroy any of his works, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor blot out the posterity of his elect. </div>
<div class='q'>He won’t take away the offspring him who loved him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gave a remnant to Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to David a root from his own family. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_23">23&#160;</span>So Solomon rested with his fathers. </div>
<div class='q2'>Of his offspring, he left behind him Rehoboam, </div>
<div class='q2'>the foolishness of the people, and one who lacked understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>who made the people revolt by his counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>Also Jeroboam the son of Nebat, </div>
<div class='q2'>who made Israel to sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave a way of sin to Ephraim. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_24">24&#160;</span>Their sins were multiplied exceedingly, </div>
<div class='q2'>until they were removed from their land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR47_25">25&#160;</span>For they sought out all manner of wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>until vengeance came upon them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_1">1&#160;</span>Then Elijah arose, the prophet like fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>His word burned like a torch: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_2">2&#160;</span>He brought a famine upon them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by his zeal made them few in number. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_3">3&#160;</span>By the word of the Lord he shut up the heavens. </div>
<div class='q2'>He brought down fire three times. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_4">4&#160;</span>How you were glorified, O Elijah, in your wondrous deeds! </div>
<div class='q2'>Whose glory is like yours? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_5">5&#160;</span>You raised up a dead man from death, </div>
<div class='q2'>from Hades, by the word of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_6">6&#160;</span>You brought down kings to destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and honorable men from their sickbeds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_7">7&#160;</span>You heard rebuke in Sinai, </div>
<div class='q2'>and judgments of vengeance in Horeb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_8">8&#160;</span>You anointed kings for retribution, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prophets to succeed after you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_9">9&#160;</span>You were taken up in a tempest of fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>in a chariot of fiery horses. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_10">10&#160;</span>You were recorded for reproofs in their seasons, </div>
<div class='q2'>to pacify anger, before it broke out into wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>to turn the heart of the father to the son, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to restore the tribes of Jacob. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_11">11&#160;</span>Blessed are those who saw you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who have been beautified with love; </div>
<div class='q2'>for we also shall surely live. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_12">12&#160;</span>Elijah was wrapped in a whirlwind. </div>
<div class='q2'>Elisha was filled with his spirit. </div>
<div class='q2'>In his days he was not moved by the fear of any ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one brought him into subjection. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_13">13&#160;</span>Nothing was too hard for him. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he was buried, his body prophesied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_14">14&#160;</span>As in his life he did wonders, </div>
<div class='q2'>so his works were also marvelous in death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_15">15&#160;</span>For all this the people didn’t repent. </div>
<div class='q2'>They didn’t depart from their sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>until they were carried away as a plunder from their land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and were scattered through all the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>The people were left very few in number, </div>
<div class='q2'>but with a ruler from the house of David. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_16">16&#160;</span>Some of them did that which was right, </div>
<div class='q2'>but some multiplied sins. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_17">17&#160;</span>Hezekiah fortified his city, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brought water into its midst. </div>
<div class='q'>He tunneled through rock with iron, </div>
<div class='q2'>and built cisterns for water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_18">18&#160;</span>In his days Sennacherib invaded, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sent Rabshakeh, and departed. </div>
<div class='q'>He lifted up his hand against Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and boasted great things in his arrogance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_19">19&#160;</span>Then their hearts and their hands were shaken, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they were in pain, as women in labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_20">20&#160;</span>But they called upon the Lord who is merciful, </div>
<div class='q2'>spreading out their hands to him. </div>
<div class='q'>The Holy One quickly heard them out of Heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered them by the hand of Isaiah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_21">21&#160;</span>He struck the camp of the Assyrians, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his angel utterly destroyed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_22">22&#160;</span>For Hezekiah did that which was pleasing to the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was strong in the ways of his ancestor David, </div>
<div class='q2'>which Isaiah the prophet commanded, </div>
<div class='q2'>who was great and faithful in his vision. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_23">23&#160;</span>In his days the sun went backward. </div>
<div class='q2'>He prolonged the life of the king. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_24">24&#160;</span>He saw by an excellent spirit what would come to pass in the future; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he comforted those who mourned in Zion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR48_25">25&#160;</span>He showed the things that would happen through the end of time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the hidden things before they came. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR49_0'> 49</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_1">1&#160;</span>The memory of Josiah is like the composition of incense </div>
<div class='q2'>prepared by the work of the perfumer. </div>
<div class='q'>It will be sweet as honey in every mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like music at a banquet of wine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_2">2&#160;</span>He did what was right in the reforming of the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and took away the abominations of iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_3">3&#160;</span>He set his heart right toward the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>In lawless days, he made godliness prevail. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_4">4&#160;</span>Except David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, </div>
<div class='q2'>all were wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they abandoned the law of the Most High. </div>
<div class='q2'>The kings of Judah came to an end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_5">5&#160;</span>They gave their power to others, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their glory to a foreign nation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_6">6&#160;</span>They set the chosen city of the sanctuary on fire </div>
<div class='q2'>and made her streets desolate, as it was written by the hand of Jeremiah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_7">7&#160;</span>For they mistreated him; </div>
<div class='q2'>yet he was sanctified in the womb to be a prophet, </div>
<div class='q2'>to root out, to afflict, to destroy </div>
<div class='q2'>and likewise to build and to plant. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_8">8&#160;</span>Ezekiel saw the vision of glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>which God showed him on the chariot of the cherubim. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_9">9&#160;</span>For truly he remembered the enemies in rainstorm, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to do good to those who directed their ways aright. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_10">10&#160;</span>Also of the twelve prophets,<a href='#FN93' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>may their bones flourish again out of their place. </div>
<div class='q'>He comforted the people of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered them by confident hope. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_11">11&#160;</span>How shall we magnify Zerubbabel? </div>
<div class='q2'>He was like a signet ring on the right hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_12">12&#160;</span>So was Jesus the son of Josedek, </div>
<div class='q2'>who in their days built the house, </div>
<div class='q2'>and exalted a<a href='#FN94' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> people holy to the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>prepared for everlasting glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_13">13&#160;</span>Also of Nehemiah the memory is great. </div>
<div class='q2'>He raised up for us fallen walls, </div>
<div class='q2'>set up the gates and bars, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rebuilt our houses. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_14">14&#160;</span>No man was created upon the earth like Enoch, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he was taken up from the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_15">15&#160;</span>Nor was there a man born like Joseph, </div>
<div class='q2'>a leader of his kindred, a supporter of the people. </div>
<div class='q2'>Even his bones were cared for. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR49_16">16&#160;</span>Shem and Seth were honored among men, </div>
<div class='q2'>but above every living thing in the creation was Adam. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='SR50_0'> 50</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_1">1&#160;</span> It was Simon, the son of Onias, the high priest, </div>
<div class='q2'>who in his life repaired the house, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in his days strengthened the temple. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_2">2&#160;</span>The foundation was built by him to the height of the double walls, </div>
<div class='q2'>the lofty retaining walls of the temple enclosure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_3">3&#160;</span>In his days, a water cistern was dug, </div>
<div class='q2'>the brazen vessel like the sea in circumference. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_4">4&#160;</span> He planned to save his people from ruin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fortified the city against siege. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_5">5&#160;</span>How glorious he was when the people gathered around him </div>
<div class='q2'>as he came out of the house of the veil! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_6">6&#160;</span>He was like the morning star among clouds, </div>
<div class='q2'>like the full moon, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_7">7&#160;</span>like the sun shining on the temple of the Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>like the rainbow shining in clouds of glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_8">8&#160;</span>like roses in the days of first fruits, </div>
<div class='q2'>like lilies by a water spring, </div>
<div class='q2'>like the shoot of the frankincense tree in summer time, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_9">9&#160;</span>like fire and incense in the censer, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a vessel of beaten gold adorned with all kinds of precious stones, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_10">10&#160;</span>like an olive tree loaded with fruit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a cypress growing high among the clouds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_11">11&#160;</span>When he put on his glorious robe, </div>
<div class='q2'>and clothed himself in perfect splendor, </div>
<div class='q2'>ascending to the holy altar, </div>
<div class='q2'>he made the court of the sanctuary glorious. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_12">12&#160;</span>When he received the portions out of the priests’ hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>as he stood by the hearth of the altar, </div>
<div class='q2'>with his kindred like a garland around him, </div>
<div class='q2'>he was like a young cedar in Lebanon </div>
<div class='q2'>surrounded by the trunks palm trees. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_13">13&#160;</span>All the sons of Aaron in their glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>held the Lord’s offering in their hands before all the congregation of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_14">14&#160;</span>Finishing the service at the altars, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might arrange the offering of the Most High, the Almighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_15">15&#160;</span>he stretched out his hand to the cup of libation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and poured out the cup of the grape. </div>
<div class='q'>He poured it out at the foot of the altar, </div>
<div class='q2'>a sweet smelling fragrance to the Most High, the King of all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_16">16&#160;</span>Then the sons of Aaron shouted. </div>
<div class='q2'>They sounded the trumpets of beaten work. </div>
<div class='q'>They made a great fanfare to be heard, </div>
<div class='q2'>for a reminder before the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_17">17&#160;</span>Then all the people together hurried, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fell down to the ground on their faces </div>
<div class='q2'>to worship their Lord, the Almighty, God Most High. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_18">18&#160;</span>The singers also praised him with their voices. </div>
<div class='q2'>There was a sweet melody in the whole house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_19">19&#160;</span>And the people implored the Lord Most High, </div>
<div class='q2'>in prayer before him who is merciful, </div>
<div class='q2'>until the worship of the Lord was finished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and so they accomplished his service. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_20">20&#160;</span>Then he went down, and lifted up his hands </div>
<div class='q2'>over the whole congregation of the children of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>to give blessing to the Lord with his lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to glory in his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_21">21&#160;</span>He bowed himself down in worship the second time, </div>
<div class='q2'>to declare the blessing from the Most High. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_22">22&#160;</span>Now bless the God of all, </div>
<div class='q2'>who everywhere does great things, </div>
<div class='q2'>who exalts our days from the womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>and deals with us according to his mercy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_23">23&#160;</span>May he grant us joyfulness of heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that peace may be in our days in Israel for the days of eternity, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_24">24&#160;</span>to entrust his mercy with us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let him deliver us in his time! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_25">25&#160;</span>With two nations is my soul vexed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the third is no nation: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_26">26&#160;</span>Those who sit on the mountain of<a href='#FN95' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Samaria, the Philistines, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the foolish people who live in Shechem. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_27">27&#160;</span>I have written in this book the instruction of understanding and knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>I Jesus, the son of Sirach Eleazar, of Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='q2'>who out of his heart poured forth wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_28">28&#160;</span>Blessed is he who will exercise these things. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who lays them up in his heart will become wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR50_29">29&#160;</span>For if he does them, he will be strong in all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the light of the Lord is his guide.<a href='#FN96' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='SR51_0'>51</div>
<div class='p'>A Prayer of Jesus the son of Sirach. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_1">1&#160;</span>I will give thanks to you, O Lord, O King, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will praise you, O God my Savior. </div>
<div class='q'>I give thanks to your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_2">2&#160;</span>for you have been my protector and helper, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered my body out of destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and out of the snare of a slanderous tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>from lips that fabricate lies. </div>
<div class='q'>You were my helper before those who stood by, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_3">3&#160;</span>and delivered me, according to the abundance of your mercy and of your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the gnashings of teeth ready to devour, </div>
<div class='q2'>out of the hand of those seeking my life, </div>
<div class='q2'>out of the many afflictions I endured, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_4">4&#160;</span>from the choking of a fire on every side, </div>
<div class='q2'>and out of the midst of fire that I hadn’t kindled, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_5">5&#160;</span>out of the depth of the belly of Hades, </div>
<div class='q2'>from an unclean tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from lying words— </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_6">6&#160;</span>the slander of an unrighteous tongue to the king. </div>
<div class='q'>My soul drew near to death. </div>
<div class='q2'>My life was near to Hades. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_7">7&#160;</span>They surrounded me on every side. </div>
<div class='q2'>There was no one to help me. </div>
<div class='q'>I was looking for human help, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there was none. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_8">8&#160;</span>Then I remembered your mercy, O Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your working which has been from everlasting, </div>
<div class='q2'>how you deliver those who wait for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and save them out of the hand of their enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_9">9&#160;</span>I lifted up my prayer from the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prayed for deliverance from death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_10">10&#160;</span>I called upon the Lord, the Father of my Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he would not forsake me in the days of affliction, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the time when there was no help against the proud. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_11">11&#160;</span>I will praise your name continually. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will sing praise with thanksgiving. </div>
<div class='q2'>My prayer was heard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_12">12&#160;</span>You saved me from destruction </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered me from the evil time. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore I will give thanks and praise to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bless the name of the Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_13">13&#160;</span>When I was yet young, </div>
<div class='q2'>before I went abroad, </div>
<div class='q2'>I sought wisdom openly in my prayer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_14">14&#160;</span>Before the temple I asked for her. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will seek her out even to the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_15">15&#160;</span>From the first flower to the ripening grape my heart delighted in her. </div>
<div class='q2'>My foot walked in uprightness. </div>
<div class='q2'>From my youth I followed her steps. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_16">16&#160;</span>I inclined my ear a little, and received her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and found for myself much instruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_17">17&#160;</span>I profited in her. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will give glory to him who gives me wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_18">18&#160;</span>For I determined to practice her. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was zealous for that which is good. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will never be put to shame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_19">19&#160;</span>My soul has wrestled with her. </div>
<div class='q2'>In my conduct I was exact. </div>
<div class='q'>I spread out my hands to the heaven above, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bewailed my ignorances of her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_20">20&#160;</span>I directed my soul to her. </div>
<div class='q2'>In purity I found her. </div>
<div class='q'>I got myself a heart joined with her from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I won’t be forsaken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_21">21&#160;</span>My belly also was troubled to seek her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I have gained a good possession. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_22">22&#160;</span>The Lord gave me a tongue for my reward. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will praise him with it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_23">23&#160;</span>Draw near to me, all you who are uneducated, </div>
<div class='q2'>and live in the house of instruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_24">24&#160;</span>Why therefore are you all lacking in these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your souls are very thirsty? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_25">25&#160;</span>I opened my mouth and spoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Get her for yourselves without money.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_26">26&#160;</span>Put your neck under the yoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let your soul receive instruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>She is near to find. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_27">27&#160;</span>See with your eyes </div>
<div class='q2'>how that I labored just a little </div>
<div class='q2'>and found for myself much rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_28">28&#160;</span>Get instruction with a great sum of silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gain much gold by her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_29">29&#160;</span>May your soul rejoice in his mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and may you all not be put to shame in praising him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="SR51_30">30&#160;</span>Work your work before the time comes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in his time he will give you your reward. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 5 is omitted by the best authorities: </span><span class="fqa">The source of wisdom is God’s word in the highest heaven, and her ways are the eternal commandments.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 7 is omitted by the best authorities: </span><span class="fqa">To whom was the knowledge of wisdom manifested? Who has understood her abundant experience?</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_15"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">nested. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_18"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">health of cure. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:18</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities: </span><span class="fqa">Both are gifts of God for peace; glory opens out for those who love him. He saw her and took her measure.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR1_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:21</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 21 is omitted by the best authorities: </span><span class="fqa">The fear of the Lord drives away sins. Where it resides, it will turn away all anger. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Some manuscripts add </span><span class="fqa">those who fear the Lord honor their father,</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_19"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:19</a>
 <span class="ft">Some manuscripts add </span><span class="fqa">Many are lofty and renowned, but he reveals his secrets to the humble.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR3_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3:25</a>
 <span class="ft">Some manuscripts omit verse 25.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">she </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR4_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:23</a>
 <span class="ft">Some manuscripts omit this line. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR6_30"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 6:30</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='NUM.xhtml#NU15_38'>Numbers 15:38</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">Don’t plow</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR7_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:26</a>
 <span class="ft">Many authorities omit this line </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:9</a>
 <span class="ft">The preceding line of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">Hades. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR9_13"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">authority </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Two lines of this verse are here omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10:21</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 21 is omitted by the best authorities: Fear of the Lord is the beginning of acceptance, but obstinance and pride are the beginning of rejection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR10_27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10:27</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek text of this verse is uncertain. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">tyrants </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR11_15-16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 11:15-16</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 15 and 16 are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR12_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">punished </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">along with. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:14</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of verse 13, and verse 14, are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR13_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 13:25</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_15-16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:15-16</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 15 and 16 are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_21"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:21</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">among hidden things. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_22"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 16:22</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_23"><span class="notemark">§</span> 16:23</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">heart. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_30"><span class="notemark">*</span> 16:30</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek text of this line is uncertain. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR16_30"><span class="notemark">†</span> 16:30</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">The soul of every living thing. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 5 is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 9 is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:10</a>
 <span class="ft">This line is added by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 17:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 16, 18, and 21 are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The preceding part of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 16, 18, and 21 are omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_21"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 17:21</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 16, 18, and 21 are omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_22"><span class="notemark">§</span> 17:22</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR17_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:26</a>
 <span class="ft">A line is here omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 18:3</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of verse 2, and verse 3, are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_27"><span class="notemark">†</span> 18:27</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_31"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 18:31</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">a rejoicing to </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR18_33"><span class="notemark">§</span> 18:33</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:5</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The preceding part of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_18-19"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 19:18-19</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 18 and 19 are omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_21"><span class="notemark">§</span> 19:21</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of verse 20, and verse 21, are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR19_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:25</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN52"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:3</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 3 is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN53"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:14</a>
 <span class="ft">A line of this verse is here omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN54"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 20:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The latter part of verse 17 is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN55"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR20_32"><span class="notemark">§</span> 20:32</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 32 is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN56"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">him. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN57"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 21:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">unexamined words. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN58"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR21_25"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 21:25</a>
 <span class="ft">The text seems to be uncertain. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN59"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_9-10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 22:9-10</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 9 and 10 are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN60"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR22_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 22:23</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN61"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:3</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN62"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:4</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN63"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23:5</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN64"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR23_28"><span class="notemark">§</span> 23:28</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 28 is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN65"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:15</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX30_34'>Exodus 30:34</a>. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN66"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 24:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 18 is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN67"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR24_24"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 24:24</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 24 is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN68"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_12"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Verse 12 is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN69"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR25_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25:26</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN70"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">countenance. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN71"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, fatten</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN72"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR26_19-27"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 26:19-27</a>
 <span class="ft">Verses 19-27 are omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN73"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Some ancient authorities read </span><span class="fqa">Many therefore. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN74"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR29_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 29:23</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN75"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30:11</a>
 <span class="ft">This line and the previous two lines are absent from some older MSS.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN76"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 30:12</a>
 <span class="ft">These three lines are absent from the oldest MSS.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN77"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 30:12</a>
 <span class="ft">These three lines are absent from the oldest MSS.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN78"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 30:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The oldest MSS. omit </span><span class="fqa">and eternal rest.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN79"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR30_17"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30:17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">age-long rest. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN80"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR31_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31:2</a>
 <span class="ft">This appears to be the meaning; but the Greek text here is probably corrupt. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN81"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33:14</a>
 <span class="ft">A line of this verse is here omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN82"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR33_32"><span class="notemark">†</span> 33:32</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek text of this line is probably corrupt. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN83"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36:2</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN84"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 36:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN85"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_11"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 36:11</a>
 <span class="ft">The ancient authorities read </span><span class="fqa">I took them for my inheritance: </span><span class="ft">but the Greek text is here very confused. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN86"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR36_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 36:17</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">God of the ages.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN87"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR38_33"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38:33</a>
 <span class="ft">This line is absent from the oldest MSS. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN88"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41:4</a>
 <span class="ft">or, </span><span class="fqa">the place of the dead </span><span class="ft">or, </span><span class="fqa">Sheol</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN89"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR41_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 41:8</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN90"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 46:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">his. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN91"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR46_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 46:6</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a class='bibleref' href='JOS.xhtml#JS10_11'>Joshua 10:11</a> </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN92"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR47_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 47:9</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN93"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 49:10</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this line is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN94"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR49_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 49:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Some ancient authorities read </span><span class="fqa">temple. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN95"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_26"><span class="notemark">*</span> 50:26</a>
 <span class="ft">According to some ancient versions, </span><span class="fqa">Seir. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN96"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#SR50_29"><span class="notemark">†</span> 50:29</a>
 <span class="ft">The remainder of this verse is omitted by the best authorities. </span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
