<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon 2 Chronicles 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>2 Chronicles</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R21_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R22_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R23_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R24_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R25_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R26_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R27_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R28_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R29_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R210_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R211_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R212_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R213_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R214_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R215_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R216_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R217_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R218_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R219_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R220_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R221_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R222_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R223_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R224_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R225_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R226_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R227_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R228_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R229_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R230_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R231_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R232_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R233_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R234_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R235_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='2CH.xhtml#R236_0'>36</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='R20_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Second Book of Chronicles  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R21_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="R21_1">1&#160;</span>Solomon the son of David was firmly established in his kingdom, and Yahweh<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> his God<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> was with him, and made him exceedingly great. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_2">2&#160;</span>Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, to the judges, and to every prince in all Israel, the heads of the fathers’ households. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_3">3&#160;</span>Then Solomon, and all the assembly with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon; for God’s Tent of Meeting was there, which Yahweh’s servant Moses had made in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_4">4&#160;</span>But David had brought God’s ark up from Kiriath Jearim to the place that David had prepared for it; for he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover the bronze altar that Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made was there before Yahweh’s tabernacle; and Solomon and the assembly were seeking counsel there. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_6">6&#160;</span>Solomon went up there to the bronze altar before Yahweh, which was at the Tent of Meeting, and offered one thousand burnt offerings on it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_7">7&#160;</span>That night, God appeared to Solomon and said to him, “Ask for what you want me to give you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_8">8&#160;</span>Solomon said to God, “You have shown great loving kindness to David my father, and have made me king in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_9">9&#160;</span>Now, Yahweh God, let your promise to David my father be established; for you have made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_10">10&#160;</span>Now give me wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this great people of yours?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_11">11&#160;</span>God said to Solomon, “Because this was in your heart, and you have not asked riches, wealth, honor, or the life of those who hate you, nor yet have you asked for long life; but have asked for wisdom and knowledge for yourself, that you may judge my people, over whom I have made you king, 
<span class="verse" id="R21_12">12&#160;</span>therefore wisdom and knowledge is granted to you. I will give you riches, wealth, and honor, such as none of the kings have had who have been before you, and none after you will have.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_13">13&#160;</span>So Solomon came from the high place that was at Gibeon, from before the Tent of Meeting, to Jerusalem; and he reigned over Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R21_14">14&#160;</span>Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen. He had one thousand four hundred chariots and twelve thousand horsemen that he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_15">15&#160;</span>The king made silver and gold to be as common as stones in Jerusalem, and he made cedars to be as common as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_16">16&#160;</span>The horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt and from Kue. The king’s merchants purchased them from Kue. 
<span class="verse" id="R21_17">17&#160;</span>They imported from Egypt then exported a chariot for six hundred pieces of silver and a horse for one hundred fifty.<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> They also exported them to the Hittite kings and the Syrian<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> kings.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R22_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_1">1&#160;</span>Now Solomon decided to build a house for Yahweh’s name, and a house for his kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_2">2&#160;</span>Solomon counted out seventy thousand men to bear burdens, eighty thousand men who were stone cutters in the mountains, and three thousand six hundred to oversee them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_3">3&#160;</span>Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, “As you dealt with David my father, and sent him cedars to build him a house in which to dwell, so deal with me. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_4">4&#160;</span>Behold,<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> I am about to build a house for the name of Yahweh my God, to dedicate it to him, to burn before him incense of sweet spices, for the continual show bread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and on the set feasts of Yahweh our God. This is an ordinance forever to Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_5">5&#160;</span>“The house which I am building will be great, for our God is greater than all gods. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_6">6&#160;</span>But who is able to build him a house, since heaven and the heaven of heavens can’t contain him? Who am I then, that I should build him a house, except just to burn incense before him? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_7">7&#160;</span>“Now therefore send me a man skillful to work in gold, in silver, in bronze, in iron, and in purple, crimson, and blue, and who knows how to engrave engravings, to be with the skillful men who are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father provided. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_8">8&#160;</span>“Send me also cedar trees, cypress trees, and algum trees out of Lebanon, for I know that your servants know how to cut timber in Lebanon. Behold, my servants will be with your servants, 
<span class="verse" id="R22_9">9&#160;</span>even to prepare me timber in abundance; for the house which I am about to build will be great and wonderful. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, I will give to your servants, the cutters who cut timber, twenty thousand cors<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of beaten wheat, twenty thousand baths<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of barley, twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_11">11&#160;</span>Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, “Because Yahweh loves his people, he has made you king over them.” 
<span class="verse" id="R22_12">12&#160;</span>Huram continued, “Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, who made heaven and earth, who has given to David the king a wise son, endowed with discretion and understanding, who would build a house for Yahweh and a house for his kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_13">13&#160;</span>Now I have sent a skillful man, endowed with understanding, Huram-abi,<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R22_14">14&#160;</span>the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan; and his father was a man of Tyre. He is skillful to work in gold, in silver, in bronze, in iron, in stone, in timber, in purple, in blue, in fine linen, and in crimson, also to engrave any kind of engraving and to devise any device, that there may be a place appointed to him with your skillful men, and with the skillful men of my lord David your father. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_15">15&#160;</span>“Now therefore, the wheat, the barley, the oil, and the wine which my lord has spoken of, let him send to his servants; 
<span class="verse" id="R22_16">16&#160;</span>and we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as you need. We will bring it to you in rafts by sea to Joppa; then you shall carry it up to Jerusalem.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R22_17">17&#160;</span>Solomon counted all the foreigners who were in the land of Israel, after the census with which David his father had counted them; and they found one hundred fifty-three thousand six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R22_18">18&#160;</span>He set seventy thousand of them to bear burdens, eighty thousand who were stone cutters in the mountains, and three thousand six hundred overseers to assign the people their work.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R23_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_1">1&#160;</span>Then Solomon began to build Yahweh’s house at Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where Yahweh appeared to David his father, which he prepared in the place that David had appointed, on the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_2">2&#160;</span>He began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_3">3&#160;</span>Now these are the foundations which Solomon laid for the building of God’s house: the length by cubits<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> after the first measure was sixty cubits, and the width twenty cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_4">4&#160;</span>The porch that was in front, its length, across the width of the house, was twenty cubits, and the height one hundred twenty; and he overlaid it within with pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_5">5&#160;</span>He made the larger room with a ceiling of cypress wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and ornamented it with palm trees and chains. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_6">6&#160;</span>He decorated the house with precious stones for beauty. The gold was gold from Parvaim. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_7">7&#160;</span>He also overlaid the house, the beams, the thresholds, its walls, and its doors with gold, and engraved cherubim on the walls. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_8">8&#160;</span>He made the most holy place. Its length, according to the width of the house, was twenty cubits, and its width twenty cubits; and he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R23_9">9&#160;</span>The weight of the nails was fifty shekels<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of gold. He overlaid the upper rooms with gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_10">10&#160;</span>In the most holy place he made two cherubim by carving, and they overlaid them with gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_11">11&#160;</span>The wings of the cherubim were twenty cubits long: the wing of the one was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house; and the other wing was five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_12">12&#160;</span>The wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house; and the other wing was five cubits, joining to the wing of the other cherub. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_13">13&#160;</span>The wings of these cherubim spread themselves out twenty cubits. They stood on their feet, and their faces were toward the house. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_14">14&#160;</span>He made the veil of blue, purple, crimson, and fine linen, and ornamented it with cherubim. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R23_15">15&#160;</span>Also he made before the house two pillars thirty-five cubits heigh, and the capital that was on the top of each of them was five cubits. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_16">16&#160;</span>He made chains in the inner sanctuary, and put them on the tops of the pillars; and he made one hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains. 
<span class="verse" id="R23_17">17&#160;</span>He set up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand and the other on the left; and called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R24_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_1">1&#160;</span>Then he made an altar of bronze, twenty cubits<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> long, twenty cubits wide, and ten cubits high. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_2">2&#160;</span>Also he made the molten sea<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of ten cubits from brim to brim. It was round, five cubits high, and thirty cubits in circumference. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_3">3&#160;</span>Under it was the likeness of oxen, which encircled it, for ten cubits, encircling the sea. The oxen were in two rows, cast when it was cast. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_4">4&#160;</span>It stood on twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, three looking toward the west, three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east; and the sea was set on them above, and all their hindquarters were inward. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_5">5&#160;</span>It was a handbreadth thick. Its brim was made like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It received and held three thousand baths.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R24_6">6&#160;</span>He also made ten basins, and put five on the right hand and five on the left, to wash in them. The things that belonged to the burnt offering were washed in them, but the sea was for the priests to wash in. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_7">7&#160;</span>He made the ten lamp stands of gold according to the ordinance concerning them; and he set them in the temple, five on the right hand and five on the left. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_8">8&#160;</span>He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side and five on the left. He made one hundred basins of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_9">9&#160;</span>Furthermore he made the court of the priests, the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid their doors with bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_10">10&#160;</span>He set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_11">11&#160;</span>Huram made the pots, the shovels, and the basins. </div>
<div class='p'>So Huram finished doing the work that he did for king Solomon in God’s house: 
<span class="verse" id="R24_12">12&#160;</span>the two pillars, the bowls, the two capitals which were on the top of the pillars, the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars, 
<span class="verse" id="R24_13">13&#160;</span>and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks—two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the pillars. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_14">14&#160;</span>He also made the bases, and he made the basins on the bases— 
<span class="verse" id="R24_15">15&#160;</span>one sea, and the twelve oxen under it. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_16">16&#160;</span>Huram-abi<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> also made the pots, the shovels, the forks, and all its vessels for king Solomon, for Yahweh’s house, of bright bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_17">17&#160;</span>The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah. 
<span class="verse" id="R24_18">18&#160;</span>Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance, so that the weight of the bronze could not be determined. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R24_19">19&#160;</span>Solomon made all the vessels that were in God’s house: the golden altar, the tables with the show bread on them, 
<span class="verse" id="R24_20">20&#160;</span>and the lamp stands with their lamps to burn according to the ordinance before the inner sanctuary, of pure gold; 
<span class="verse" id="R24_21">21&#160;</span>and the flowers, the lamps, and the tongs of gold that was purest gold; 
<span class="verse" id="R24_22">22&#160;</span>and the snuffers, the basins, the spoons, and the fire pans of pure gold. As for the entry of the house, its inner doors for the most holy place and the doors of the main hall of the temple were of gold.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R25_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_1">1&#160;</span>Thus all the work that Solomon did for Yahweh’s house was finished. Solomon brought in the things that David his father had dedicated, even the silver, the gold, and all the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of God’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_2">2&#160;</span>Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers’ households of the children of Israel, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of Yahweh’s covenant out of David’s city, which is Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_3">3&#160;</span>So all the men of Israel assembled themselves to the king at the feast, which was in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_4">4&#160;</span>All the elders of Israel came. The Levites took up the ark. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_5">5&#160;</span>They brought up the ark, the Tent of Meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the Tent. The Levitical priests brought these up. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_6">6&#160;</span>King Solomon and all the congregation of Israel who were assembled to him were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and cattle that could not be counted or numbered for multitude. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_7">7&#160;</span>The priests brought in the ark of Yahweh’s covenant to its place, into the inner sanctuary of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_8">8&#160;</span>For the cherubim spread out their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and its poles above. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_9">9&#160;</span>The poles were so long that the ends of the poles were seen from the ark in front of the inner sanctuary, but they were not seen outside; and it is there to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="R25_10">10&#160;</span>There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets which Moses put there at Horeb, when Yahweh made a covenant with the children of Israel, when they came out of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R25_11">11&#160;</span>When the priests had come out of the holy place (for all the priests who were present had sanctified themselves, and didn’t keep their divisions; 
<span class="verse" id="R25_12">12&#160;</span>also the Levites who were the singers, all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and their brothers, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and stringed instruments and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them one hundred twenty priests sounding with trumpets); 
<span class="verse" id="R25_13">13&#160;</span>when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking Yahweh; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised Yahweh, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“For he is good, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his loving kindness endures forever!” </div>
<div class='m'>then the house was filled with a cloud, even Yahweh’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="R25_14">14&#160;</span>so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud; for Yahweh’s glory filled God’s house.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R26_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_1">1&#160;</span>Then Solomon said, “Yahweh has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_2">2&#160;</span>But I have built you a house and home, a place for you to dwell in forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_3">3&#160;</span>The king turned his face, and blessed all the assembly of Israel; and all the assembly of Israel stood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_4">4&#160;</span>He said, “Blessed be Yahweh, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and has with his hands fulfilled it, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_5">5&#160;</span>‘Since the day that I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house in, that my name might be there, and I chose no man to be prince over my people Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_6">6&#160;</span>but now I have chosen Jerusalem, that my name might be there; and I have chosen David to be over my people Israel.’ 
<span class="verse" id="R26_7">7&#160;</span>Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_8">8&#160;</span>But Yahweh said to David my father, ‘Whereas it was in your heart to build a house for my name, you did well that it was in your heart; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_9">9&#160;</span>nevertheless you shall not build the house, but your son who will come out of your body, he shall build the house for my name.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_10">10&#160;</span>“Yahweh has performed his word that he spoke; for I have risen up in the place of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as Yahweh promised, and have built the house for the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_11">11&#160;</span>There I have set the ark, in which is Yahweh’s covenant, which he made with the children of Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_12">12&#160;</span>He stood before Yahweh’s altar in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands 
<span class="verse" id="R26_13">13&#160;</span>(for Solomon had made a bronze platform, five cubits<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> long, five cubits wide, and three cubits high, and had set it in the middle of the court; and he stood on it, and knelt down on his knees before all the assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands toward heaven). 
<span class="verse" id="R26_14">14&#160;</span>Then he said, “Yahweh, the God of Israel, there is no God like you in heaven or on earth—you who keep covenant and loving kindness with your servants who walk before you with all their heart; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_15">15&#160;</span>who have kept with your servant David my father that which you promised him. Yes, you spoke with your mouth, and have fulfilled it with your hand, as it is today. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_16">16&#160;</span>“Now therefore, Yahweh, the God of Israel, keep with your servant David my father that which you have promised him, saying, ‘There shall not fail you a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only your children take heed to their way, to walk in my law as you have walked before me.’ 
<span class="verse" id="R26_17">17&#160;</span>Now therefore, Yahweh, the God of Israel, let your word be verified, which you spoke to your servant David. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_18">18&#160;</span>“But will God indeed dwell with men on the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens can’t contain you; how much less this house which I have built! 
<span class="verse" id="R26_19">19&#160;</span>Yet have respect for the prayer of your servant and to his supplication, Yahweh my God, to listen to the cry and to the prayer which your servant prays before you; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_20">20&#160;</span>that your eyes may be open toward this house day and night, even toward the place where you have said that you would put your name, to listen to the prayer which your servant will pray toward this place. 
<span class="verse" id="R26_21">21&#160;</span>Listen to the petitions of your servant and of your people Israel, when they pray toward this place. Yes, hear from your dwelling place, even from heaven; and when you hear, forgive. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_22">22&#160;</span>“If a man sins against his neighbor, and an oath is laid on him to cause him to swear, and he comes and swears before your altar in this house, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_23">23&#160;</span>then hear from heaven, act, and judge your servants, bringing retribution to the wicked, to bring his way on his own head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_24">24&#160;</span>“If your people Israel are struck down before the enemy because they have sinned against you, and they turn again and confess your name, and pray and make supplication before you in this house, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_25">25&#160;</span>then hear from heaven, and forgive the sin of your people Israel, and bring them again to the land which you gave to them and to their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_26">26&#160;</span>“When the sky is shut up and there is no rain because they have sinned against you, if they pray toward this place and confess your name, and turn from their sin when you afflict them, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_27">27&#160;</span>then hear in heaven, and forgive the sin of your servants, your people Israel, when you teach them the good way in which they should walk, and send rain on your land, which you have given to your people for an inheritance. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_28">28&#160;</span>“If there is famine in the land, if there is pestilence, if there is blight or mildew, locust or caterpillar; if their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities; whatever plague or whatever sickness there is— 
<span class="verse" id="R26_29">29&#160;</span>whatever prayer and supplication is made by any man, or by all your people Israel, who will each know his own plague and his own sorrow, and shall spread out his hands toward this house, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_30">30&#160;</span>then hear from heaven your dwelling place and forgive, and render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart you know (for you, even you only, know the hearts of the children of men), 
<span class="verse" id="R26_31">31&#160;</span>that they may fear you, to walk in your ways as long as they live in the land which you gave to our fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_32">32&#160;</span>“Moreover, concerning the foreigner, who is not of your people Israel, when he comes from a far country for your great name’s sake and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm, when they come and pray toward this house, 
<span class="verse" id="R26_33">33&#160;</span>then hear from heaven, even from your dwelling place, and do according to all that the foreigner calls to you for; that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as do your people Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built is called by your name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_34">34&#160;</span>“If your people go out to battle against their enemies, by whatever way you send them, and they pray to you toward this city which you have chosen, and the house which I have built for your name; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_35">35&#160;</span>then hear from heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_36">36&#160;</span>“If they sin against you (for there is no man who doesn’t sin), and you are angry with them and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to a land far off or near; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_37">37&#160;</span>yet if they come to their senses in the land where they are carried captive, and turn again, and make supplication to you in the land of their captivity, saying, ‘We have sinned, we have done perversely, and have dealt wickedly;’ 
<span class="verse" id="R26_38">38&#160;</span>if they return to you with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity, where they have been taken captive, and pray toward their land which you gave to their fathers, and the city which you have chosen, and toward the house which I have built for your name; 
<span class="verse" id="R26_39">39&#160;</span>then hear from heaven, even from your dwelling place, their prayer and their petitions, and maintain their cause, and forgive your people who have sinned against you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_40">40&#160;</span>“Now, my God, let, I beg you, your eyes be open, and let your ears be attentive to the prayer that is made in this place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_41">41&#160;</span>“Now therefore arise, Yahweh God, into your resting place, you, and the ark of your strength. Let your priests, Yahweh God, be clothed with salvation, and let your saints rejoice in goodness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R26_42">42&#160;</span>“Yahweh God, don’t turn away the face of your anointed. Remember your loving kindnesses to David your servant.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R27_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_1">1&#160;</span>Now when Solomon had finished praying, fire came down from heaven and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices; and Yahweh’s glory filled the house. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_2">2&#160;</span>The priests could not enter into Yahweh’s house, because Yahweh’s glory filled Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_3">3&#160;</span>All the children of Israel looked on, when the fire came down, and Yahweh’s glory was on the house. They bowed themselves with their faces to the ground on the pavement, worshiped, and gave thanks to Yahweh, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“For he is good, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his loving kindness endures forever!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_4">4&#160;</span>Then the king and all the people offered sacrifices before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_5">5&#160;</span>King Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand head of cattle and a hundred twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated God’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_6">6&#160;</span>The priests stood, according to their positions; the Levites also with instruments of music of Yahweh, which David the king had made to give thanks to Yahweh, when David praised by their ministry, saying “For his loving kindness endures forever.” The priests sounded trumpets before them; and all Israel stood. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_7">7&#160;</span>Moreover Solomon made the middle of the court that was before Yahweh’s house holy; for there he offered the burnt offerings and the fat of the peace offerings, because the bronze altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offering, the meal offering, and the fat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_8">8&#160;</span>So Solomon held the feast at that time for seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_9">9&#160;</span>On the eighth day, they held a solemn assembly; for they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_10">10&#160;</span>On the twenty-third day of the seventh month, he sent the people away to their tents, joyful and glad of heart for the goodness that Yahweh had shown to David, to Solomon, and to Israel his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_11">11&#160;</span>Thus Solomon finished Yahweh’s house and the king’s house; and he successfully completed all that came into Solomon’s heart to make in Yahweh’s house and in his own house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_12">12&#160;</span>Then Yahweh appeared to Solomon by night, and said to him, “I have heard your prayer, and have chosen this place for myself for a house of sacrifice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_13">13&#160;</span>“If I shut up the sky so that there is no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people, 
<span class="verse" id="R27_14">14&#160;</span>if my people who are called by my name will humble themselves, pray, seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven, will forgive their sin, and will heal their land. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_15">15&#160;</span>Now my eyes will be open and my ears attentive to prayer that is made in this place. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_16">16&#160;</span>For now I have chosen and made this house holy, that my name may be there forever; and my eyes and my heart will be there perpetually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_17">17&#160;</span>“As for you, if you will walk before me as David your father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded you, and will keep my statutes and my ordinances, 
<span class="verse" id="R27_18">18&#160;</span>then I will establish the throne of your kingdom, according as I covenanted with David your father, saying, ‘There shall not fail you a man to be ruler in Israel.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R27_19">19&#160;</span>But if you turn away and forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set before you, and go and serve other gods and worship them, 
<span class="verse" id="R27_20">20&#160;</span>then I will pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them; and this house, which I have made holy for my name, I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it a proverb and a byword among all peoples. 
<span class="verse" id="R27_21">21&#160;</span>This house, which is so high, everyone who passes by it will be astonished and say, ‘Why has Yahweh done this to this land and to this house?’ 
<span class="verse" id="R27_22">22&#160;</span>They shall answer, ‘Because they abandoned Yahweh, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and took other gods, worshiped them, and served them. Therefore he has brought all this evil on them.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R28_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_1">1&#160;</span>At the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built Yahweh’s house and his own house, 
<span class="verse" id="R28_2">2&#160;</span>Solomon built the cities which Huram had given to Solomon, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_3">3&#160;</span>Solomon went to Hamath Zobah, and prevailed against it. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_4">4&#160;</span>He built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the storage cities, which he built in Hamath. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_5">5&#160;</span>Also he built Beth Horon the upper and Beth Horon the lower, fortified cities with walls, gates, and bars; 
<span class="verse" id="R28_6">6&#160;</span>and Baalath, and all the storage cities that Solomon had, and all the cities for his chariots, the cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem, in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_7">7&#160;</span>As for all the people who were left of the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of Israel— 
<span class="verse" id="R28_8">8&#160;</span>of their children who were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel didn’t consume—of them Solomon conscripted forced labor to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_9">9&#160;</span>But of the children of Israel, Solomon made no servants for his work, but they were men of war, chief of his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_10">10&#160;</span>These were the chief officers of king Solomon, even two-hundred fifty, who ruled over the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_11">11&#160;</span>Solomon brought up Pharaoh’s daughter out of David’s city to the house that he had built for her; for he said, “My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places where Yahweh’s ark has come are holy.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_12">12&#160;</span>Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to Yahweh on Yahweh’s altar which he had built before the porch, 
<span class="verse" id="R28_13">13&#160;</span>even as the duty of every day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses on the Sabbaths, on the new moons, and on the set feasts, three times per year, during the feast of unleavened bread, during the feast of weeks, and during the feast of booths.<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_14">14&#160;</span>He appointed, according to the ordinance of David his father, the divisions of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their offices, to praise and to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required, the doorkeepers also by their divisions at every gate, for David the man of God had so commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_15">15&#160;</span>They didn’t depart from the commandment of the king to the priests and Levites concerning any matter or concerning the treasures. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_16">16&#160;</span>Now all the work of Solomon was accomplished from the day of the foundation of Yahweh’s house until it was finished. So Yahweh’s house was completed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R28_17">17&#160;</span>Then Solomon went to Ezion Geber and to Eloth, on the seashore in the land of Edom. 
<span class="verse" id="R28_18">18&#160;</span>Huram sent him ships and servants who had knowledge of the sea by the hands of his servants; and they came with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and brought from there four hundred fifty talents<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R29_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_1">1&#160;</span>When the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to test Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great caravan, including camels that bore spices, gold in abundance, and precious stones. When she had come to Solomon, she talked with him about all that was in her heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_2">2&#160;</span>Solomon answered all her questions. There wasn’t anything hidden from Solomon which he didn’t tell her. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_3">3&#160;</span>When the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, the house that he had built, 
<span class="verse" id="R29_4">4&#160;</span>the food of his table, the seating of his servants, the attendance of his ministers, their clothing, his cup bearers and their clothing, and his ascent by which he went up to Yahweh’s house, there was no more spirit in her.<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_5">5&#160;</span>She said to the king, “It was a true report that I heard in my own land of your acts and of your wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_6">6&#160;</span>However I didn’t believe their words until I came, and my eyes had seen it; and behold half of the greatness of your wisdom wasn’t told me. You exceed the fame that I heard! 
<span class="verse" id="R29_7">7&#160;</span>Happy are your men, and happy are these your servants, who stand continually before you and hear your wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_8">8&#160;</span>Blessed be Yahweh your God, who delighted in you and set you on his throne to be king for Yahweh your God, because your God loved Israel, to establish them forever. Therefore he made you king over them, to do justice and righteousness.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_9">9&#160;</span>She gave the king one hundred and twenty talents<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of gold, spices in great abundance, and precious stones. There was never before such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_10">10&#160;</span>The servants of Huram and the servants of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, also brought algum trees<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> and precious stones. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_11">11&#160;</span>The king used algum tree wood to make terraces for Yahweh’s house and for the king’s house, and harps and stringed instruments for the singers. There were none like these seen before in the land of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_12">12&#160;</span>King Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, more than that which she had brought to the king. So she turned and went to her own land, she and her servants. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_13">13&#160;</span>Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred sixty-six talents<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of gold, 
<span class="verse" id="R29_14">14&#160;</span>in addition to that which the traders and merchants brought. All the kings of Arabia and the governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_15">15&#160;</span>King Solomon made two hundred large shields of beaten gold. Six hundred shekels<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of beaten gold went to one large shield. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_16">16&#160;</span>He made three hundred shields of beaten gold. Three hundred shekels<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of gold went to one shield. The king put them in the House of the Forest of Lebanon. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_17">17&#160;</span>Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_18">18&#160;</span>There were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and armrests on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the armrests. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_19">19&#160;</span>Twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other on the six steps. There was nothing like it made in any other kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_20">20&#160;</span>All king Solomon’s drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. Silver was not considered valuable in the days of Solomon. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_21">21&#160;</span>For the king had ships that went to Tarshish with Huram’s servants. Once every three years, the ships of Tarshish came bringing gold, silver, ivory, apes, and peacocks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_22">22&#160;</span>So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_23">23&#160;</span>All the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_24">24&#160;</span>They each brought tribute: vessels of silver, vessels of gold, clothing, armor, spices, horses, and mules every year. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_25">25&#160;</span>Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen that he stationed in the chariot cities and with the king at Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_26">26&#160;</span>He ruled over all the kings from the River even to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_27">27&#160;</span>The king made silver as common in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedars to be as abundant as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_28">28&#160;</span>They brought horses for Solomon out of Egypt and out of all lands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R29_29">29&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, aren’t they written in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat? 
<span class="verse" id="R29_30">30&#160;</span>Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years. 
<span class="verse" id="R29_31">31&#160;</span>Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in his father David’s city; and Rehoboam his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R210_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_1">1&#160;</span>Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel had come to Shechem to make him king. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_2">2&#160;</span>When Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it (for he was in Egypt, where he had fled from the presence of king Solomon), Jeroboam returned out of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_3">3&#160;</span>They sent and called him; and Jeroboam and all Israel came, and they spoke to Rehoboam, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R210_4">4&#160;</span>“Your father made our yoke grievous. Now therefore make the grievous service of your father and his heavy yoke which he put on us, lighter, and we will serve you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_5">5&#160;</span>He said to them, “Come again to me after three days.” </div>
<div class='p'>So the people departed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_6">6&#160;</span>King Rehoboam took counsel with the old men, who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, “What counsel do you give me about how to answer these people?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_7">7&#160;</span>They spoke to him, saying, “If you are kind to these people, please them, and speak good words to them, then they will be your servants forever.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_8">8&#160;</span>But he abandoned the counsel of the old men which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men who had grown up with him, who stood before him. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_9">9&#160;</span>He said to them, “What counsel do you give, that we may give an answer to these people, who have spoken to me, saying, ‘Make the yoke that your father put on us lighter?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_10">10&#160;</span>The young men who had grown up with him spoke to him, saying, “Thus you shall tell the people who spoke to you, saying, ‘Your father made our yoke heavy, but make it lighter on us;’ thus you shall say to them, ‘My little finger is thicker than my father’s waist. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_11">11&#160;</span>Now whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_12">12&#160;</span>So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king asked, saying, “Come to me again the third day.” 
<span class="verse" id="R210_13">13&#160;</span>The king answered them roughly; and king Rehoboam abandoned the counsel of the old men, 
<span class="verse" id="R210_14">14&#160;</span>and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, “My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to it. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_15">15&#160;</span>So the king didn’t listen to the people; for it was brought about by God, that Yahweh might establish his word, which he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_16">16&#160;</span>When all Israel saw that the king didn’t listen to them, the people answered the king, saying, “What portion do we have in David? We don’t have an inheritance in the son of Jesse! Every man to your tents, Israel! Now see to your own house, David.” So all Israel departed to their tents. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R210_17">17&#160;</span>But as for the children of Israel who lived in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_18">18&#160;</span>Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the men subject to forced labor; and the children of Israel stoned him to death with stones. King Rehoboam hurried to get himself up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R210_19">19&#160;</span>So Israel rebelled against David’s house to this day.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R211_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_1">1&#160;</span>When Rehoboam had come to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, one hundred eighty thousand chosen men who were warriors, to fight against Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_2">2&#160;</span>But Yahweh’s word came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_3">3&#160;</span>“Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_4">4&#160;</span>‘Yahweh says, “You shall not go up, nor fight against your brothers! Every man return to his house; for this thing is of me.” ’ ” So they listened to Yahweh’s words, and returned from going against Jeroboam. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_5">5&#160;</span>Rehoboam lived in Jerusalem, and built cities for defense in Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_6">6&#160;</span>He built Bethlehem, Etam, Tekoa, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_7">7&#160;</span>Beth Zur, Soco, Adullam, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_8">8&#160;</span>Gath, Mareshah, Ziph, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_9">9&#160;</span>Adoraim, Lachish, Azekah, 
<span class="verse" id="R211_10">10&#160;</span>Zorah, Aijalon, and Hebron, which are fortified cities in Judah and in Benjamin. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_11">11&#160;</span>He fortified the strongholds and put captains in them with stores of food, oil and wine. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_12">12&#160;</span>He put shields and spears in every city, and made them exceedingly strong. Judah and Benjamin belonged to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_13">13&#160;</span>The priests and the Levites who were in all Israel stood with him out of all their territory. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_14">14&#160;</span>For the Levites left their pasture lands and their possessions, and came to Judah and Jerusalem; for Jeroboam and his sons cast them off, that they should not execute the priest’s office to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_15">15&#160;</span>He himself appointed priests for the high places, for the male goat and calf idols which he had made. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_16">16&#160;</span>After them, out of all the tribes of Israel, those who set their hearts to seek Yahweh, the God of Israel, came to Jerusalem to sacrifice to Yahweh, the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_17">17&#160;</span>So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong for three years, for they walked three years in the way of David and Solomon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R211_18">18&#160;</span>Rehoboam took a wife for himself, Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David and of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_19">19&#160;</span>She bore him sons: Jeush, Shemariah, and Zaham. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_20">20&#160;</span>After her, he took Maacah the granddaughter of Absalom; and she bore him Abijah, Attai, Ziza, and Shelomith. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_21">21&#160;</span>Rehoboam loved Maacah the granddaughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines; for he took eighteen wives and sixty concubines, and became the father of twenty-eight sons and sixty daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_22">22&#160;</span>Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah to be chief, the prince among his brothers, for he intended to make him king. 
<span class="verse" id="R211_23">23&#160;</span>He dealt wisely, and dispersed some of his sons throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, to every fortified city. He gave them food in abundance; and he sought many wives for them.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R212_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_1">1&#160;</span>When the kingdom of Rehoboam was established and he was strong, he abandoned Yahweh’s law, and all Israel with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_2">2&#160;</span>In the fifth year of king Rehoboam, Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had trespassed against Yahweh, 
<span class="verse" id="R212_3">3&#160;</span>with twelve hundred chariots and sixty thousand horsemen. The people were without number who came with him out of Egypt: the Lubim, the Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_4">4&#160;</span>He took the fortified cities which belonged to Judah, and came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_5">5&#160;</span>Now Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam and to the princes of Judah, who were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, “Yahweh says, ‘You have forsaken me, therefore I have also left you in the hand of Shishak.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_6">6&#160;</span>Then the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves; and they said, “Yahweh is righteous.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_7">7&#160;</span>When Yahweh saw that they humbled themselves, Yahweh’s word came to Shemaiah, saying, “They have humbled themselves. I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath won’t be poured out on Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_8">8&#160;</span>Nevertheless they will be his servants, that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_9">9&#160;</span>So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem and took away the treasures of Yahweh’s house and the treasures of the king’s house. He took it all away. He also took away the shields of gold which Solomon had made. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_10">10&#160;</span>King Rehoboam made shields of bronze in their place, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard, who kept the door of the king’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_11">11&#160;</span>As often as the king entered into Yahweh’s house, the guard came and bore them, then brought them back into the guard room. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_12">12&#160;</span>When he humbled himself, Yahweh’s wrath turned from him, so as not to destroy him altogether. Moreover, there were good things found in Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_13">13&#160;</span>So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem and reigned; for Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Yahweh had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. His mother’s name was Naamah the Ammonitess. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_14">14&#160;</span>He did that which was evil, because he didn’t set his heart to seek Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R212_15">15&#160;</span>Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, aren’t they written in the histories of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer, in the genealogies? There were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. 
<span class="verse" id="R212_16">16&#160;</span>Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in David’s city; and Abijah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R213_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_1">1&#160;</span>In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, Abijah began to reign over Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_2">2&#160;</span>He reigned three years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. There was war between Abijah and Jeroboam. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_3">3&#160;</span>Abijah joined battle with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men; and Jeroboam set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men, who were mighty men of valor. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_4">4&#160;</span>Abijah stood up on Mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill country of Ephraim, and said, “Hear me, Jeroboam and all Israel: 
<span class="verse" id="R213_5">5&#160;</span>Ought you not to know that Yahweh, the God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to David forever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt? 
<span class="verse" id="R213_6">6&#160;</span>Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up, and rebelled against his lord. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_7">7&#160;</span>Worthless men were gathered to him, wicked fellows who strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon, when Rehoboam was young and tender hearted, and could not withstand them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_8">8&#160;</span>“Now you intend to withstand the kingdom of Yahweh in the hand of the sons of David. You are a great multitude, and the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods are with you. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_9">9&#160;</span>Haven’t you driven out the priests of Yahweh, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and made priests for yourselves according to the ways of the peoples of other lands? Whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bull and seven rams may be a priest of those who are no gods. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_10">10&#160;</span>“But as for us, Yahweh is our God, and we have not forsaken him. We have priests serving Yahweh, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites in their work. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_11">11&#160;</span>They burn to Yahweh every morning and every evening burnt offerings and sweet incense. They also set the show bread in order on the pure table, and care for the gold lamp stand with its lamps, to burn every evening; for we keep the instruction of Yahweh our God, but you have forsaken him. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_12">12&#160;</span>Behold, God is with us at our head, and his priests with the trumpets of alarm to sound an alarm against you. Children of Israel, don’t fight against Yahweh, the God of your fathers; for you will not prosper.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_13">13&#160;</span>But Jeroboam caused an ambush to come about behind them; so they were before Judah, and the ambush was behind them. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_14">14&#160;</span>When Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind them; and they cried to Yahweh, and the priests sounded with the trumpets. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_15">15&#160;</span>Then the men of Judah gave a shout. As the men of Judah shouted, God struck Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_16">16&#160;</span>The children of Israel fled before Judah, and God delivered them into their hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_17">17&#160;</span>Abijah and his people killed them with a great slaughter, so five hundred thousand chosen men of Israel fell down slain. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_18">18&#160;</span>Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied on Yahweh, the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_19">19&#160;</span>Abijah pursued Jeroboam, and took cities from him: Bethel with its villages, Jeshanah with its villages, and Ephron with its villages. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R213_20">20&#160;</span>Jeroboam didn’t recover strength again in the days of Abijah. Yahweh struck him, and he died. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_21">21&#160;</span>But Abijah grew mighty and took for himself fourteen wives, and became the father of twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="R213_22">22&#160;</span>The rest of the acts of Abijah, his ways, and his sayings are written in the commentary of the prophet Iddo.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R214_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_1">1&#160;</span>So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in David’s city; and Asa his son reigned in his place. In his days, the land was quiet ten years. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_2">2&#160;</span>Asa did that which was good and right in Yahweh his God’s eyes, 
<span class="verse" id="R214_3">3&#160;</span>for he took away the foreign altars and the high places, broke down the pillars, cut down the Asherah poles, 
<span class="verse" id="R214_4">4&#160;</span>and commanded Judah to seek Yahweh, the God of their fathers, and to obey his law and command. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_5">5&#160;</span>Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the sun images; and the kingdom was quiet before him. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_6">6&#160;</span>He built fortified cities in Judah; for the land was quiet, and he had no war in those years, because Yahweh had given him rest. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_7">7&#160;</span>For he said to Judah, “Let’s build these cities and make walls around them, with towers, gates, and bars. The land is yet before us, because we have sought Yahweh our God. We have sought him, and he has given us rest on every side.” So they built and prospered. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_8">8&#160;</span>Asa had an army of three hundred thousand out of Judah who bore bucklers and spears, and two hundred eighty thousand out of Benjamin who bore shields and drew bows. All these were mighty men of valor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_9">9&#160;</span>Zerah the Ethiopian came out against them with an army of a million troops and three hundred chariots, and he came to Mareshah. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_10">10&#160;</span>Then Asa went out to meet him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_11">11&#160;</span>Asa cried to Yahweh his God, and said, “Yahweh, there is no one besides you to help, between the mighty and him who has no strength. Help us, Yahweh our God; for we rely on you, and in your name are we come against this multitude. Yahweh, you are our God. Don’t let man prevail against you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R214_12">12&#160;</span>So Yahweh struck the Ethiopians before Asa and before Judah; and the Ethiopians fled. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_13">13&#160;</span>Asa and the people who were with him pursued them to Gerar. So many of the Ethiopians fell that they could not recover themselves, for they were destroyed before Yahweh and before his army. Judah’s army carried away very much booty. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_14">14&#160;</span>They struck all the cities around Gerar, for the fear of Yahweh came on them. They plundered all the cities, for there was much plunder in them. 
<span class="verse" id="R214_15">15&#160;</span>They also struck the tents of those who had livestock, and carried away sheep and camels in abundance, then returned to Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R215_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_1">1&#160;</span>The Spirit of God came on Azariah the son of Oded. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_2">2&#160;</span>He went out to meet Asa, and said to him, “Hear me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin! Yahweh is with you while you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found by you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_3">3&#160;</span>Now for a long time Israel was without the true God, without a teaching priest, and without law. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_4">4&#160;</span>But when in their distress they turned to Yahweh, the God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_5">5&#160;</span>In those times there was no peace to him who went out, nor to him who came in; but great troubles were on all the inhabitants of the lands. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_6">6&#160;</span>They were broken in pieces, nation against nation, and city against city; for God troubled them with all adversity. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_7">7&#160;</span>But you be strong! Don’t let your hands be slack, for your work will be rewarded.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_8">8&#160;</span>When Asa heard these words and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominations out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from the hill country of Ephraim; and he renewed Yahweh’s altar that was before Yahweh’s porch. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_9">9&#160;</span>He gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and those who lived with them out of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon; for they came to him out of Israel in abundance when they saw that Yahweh his God was with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_10">10&#160;</span>So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of Asa’s reign. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_11">11&#160;</span>They sacrificed to Yahweh in that day, of the plunder which they had brought, seven hundred head of cattle and seven thousand sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_12">12&#160;</span>They entered into the covenant to seek Yahweh, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul; 
<span class="verse" id="R215_13">13&#160;</span>and that whoever would not seek Yahweh, the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_14">14&#160;</span>They swore to Yahweh with a loud voice, with shouting, with trumpets, and with cornets. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_15">15&#160;</span>All Judah rejoiced at the oath, for they had sworn with all their heart and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found by them. Then Yahweh gave them rest all around. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R215_16">16&#160;</span>Also Maacah, the mother of Asa the king, he removed from being queen mother, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah; so Asa cut down her image, ground it into dust, and burned it at the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_17">17&#160;</span>But the high places were not taken away out of Israel; nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_18">18&#160;</span>He brought the things that his father had dedicated and that he himself had dedicated, silver, gold, and vessels into God’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R215_19">19&#160;</span>There was no more war to the thirty-fifth year of Asa’s reign.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R216_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_1">1&#160;</span>In the thirty-sixth year of Asa’s reign, Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_2">2&#160;</span>Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of Yahweh’s house and of the king’s house, and sent to Ben Hadad king of Syria, who lived at Damascus, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R216_3">3&#160;</span>“Let there be a treaty between me and you, as there was between my father and your father. Behold, I have sent you silver and gold. Go, break your treaty with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_4">4&#160;</span>Ben Hadad listened to king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel; and they struck Ijon, Dan, Abel Maim, and all the storage cities of Naphtali. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_5">5&#160;</span>When Baasha heard of it, he stopped building Ramah, and let his work cease. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_6">6&#160;</span>Then Asa the king took all Judah, and they carried away the stones and timber of Ramah, with which Baasha had built; and he built Geba and Mizpah with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_7">7&#160;</span>At that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said to him, “Because you have relied on the king of Syria, and have not relied on Yahweh your God, therefore the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_8">8&#160;</span>Weren’t the Ethiopians and the Lubim a huge army, with chariots and exceedingly many horsemen? Yet, because you relied on Yahweh, he delivered them into your hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_9">9&#160;</span>For Yahweh’s eyes run back and forth throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. You have done foolishly in this; for from now on you will have wars.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_10">10&#160;</span>Then Asa was angry with the seer, and put him in the prison; for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. Asa oppressed some of the people at the same time. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R216_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_12">12&#160;</span>In the thirty-ninth year of his reign, Asa was diseased in his feet. His disease was exceedingly great; yet in his disease he didn’t seek Yahweh, but just the physicians. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_13">13&#160;</span>Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the forty-first year of his reign. 
<span class="verse" id="R216_14">14&#160;</span>They buried him in his own tomb, which he had dug out for himself in David’s city, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odors and various kinds of spices prepared by the perfumers’ art; and they made a very great fire for him.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R217_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_1">1&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his place, and strengthened himself against Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_2">2&#160;</span>He placed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways of his father David, and didn’t seek the Baals, 
<span class="verse" id="R217_4">4&#160;</span>but sought the God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not in the ways of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_5">5&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh established the kingdom in his hand. All Judah brought tribute to Jehoshaphat, and he had riches and honor in abundance. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_6">6&#160;</span>His heart was lifted up in the ways of Yahweh. Furthermore, he took away the high places and the Asherah poles out of Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_7">7&#160;</span>Also in the third year of his reign he sent his princes, even Ben Hail, Obadiah, Zechariah, Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah; 
<span class="verse" id="R217_8">8&#160;</span>and with them Levites, even Shemaiah, Nethaniah, Zebadiah, Asahel, Shemiramoth, Jehonathan, Adonijah, Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, the Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_9">9&#160;</span>They taught in Judah, having the book of Yahweh’s law with them. They went about throughout all the cities of Judah and taught among the people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R217_10">10&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh fell on all the kingdoms of the lands that were around Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_11">11&#160;</span>Some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents and silver for tribute. The Arabians also brought him flocks: seven thousand seven hundred rams and seven thousand seven hundred male goats. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_12">12&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat grew great exceedingly; and he built fortresses and store cities in Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_13">13&#160;</span>He had many works in the cities of Judah; and men of war, mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_14">14&#160;</span>This was the numbering of them according to their fathers’ houses: From Judah, the captains of thousands: Adnah the captain, and with him three hundred thousand mighty men of valor; 
<span class="verse" id="R217_15">15&#160;</span>and next to him Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred eighty thousand; 
<span class="verse" id="R217_16">16&#160;</span>and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself to Yahweh, and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valor. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_17">17&#160;</span>From Benjamin: Eliada, a mighty man of valor, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield; 
<span class="verse" id="R217_18">18&#160;</span>and next to him Jehozabad, and with him one hundred eighty thousand ready and prepared for war. 
<span class="verse" id="R217_19">19&#160;</span>These were those who waited on the king, in addition to those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R218_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_1">1&#160;</span>Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance; and he allied himself with Ahab. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_2">2&#160;</span>After some years, he went down to Ahab to Samaria. Ahab killed sheep and cattle for him in abundance, and for the people who were with him, and moved him to go up with him to Ramoth Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_3">3&#160;</span>Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, “Will you go with me to Ramoth Gilead?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered him, “I am as you are, and my people as your people. We will be with you in the war.” 
<span class="verse" id="R218_4">4&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, “Please inquire first for Yahweh’s word.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_5">5&#160;</span>Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, four hundred men, and said to them, “Shall we go to Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?” </div>
<div class='p'>They said, “Go up, for God will deliver it into the hand of the king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_6">6&#160;</span>But Jehoshaphat said, “Isn’t there here a prophet of Yahweh besides, that we may inquire of him?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_7">7&#160;</span>The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Yahweh; but I hate him, for he never prophesies good concerning me, but always evil. He is Micaiah the son of Imla.” </div>
<div class='p'>Jehoshaphat said, “Don’t let the king say so.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_8">8&#160;</span>Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, “Get Micaiah the son of Imla quickly.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_9">9&#160;</span>Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah each sat on his throne, arrayed in their robes, and they were sitting in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets were prophesying before them. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_10">10&#160;</span>Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made himself horns of iron and said, “Yahweh says, ‘With these you shall push the Syrians, until they are consumed.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_11">11&#160;</span>All the prophets prophesied so, saying, “Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; for Yahweh will deliver it into the hand of the king.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_12">12&#160;</span>The messenger who went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying, “Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one mouth. Let your word therefore, please be like one of theirs, and speak good.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_13">13&#160;</span>Micaiah said, “As Yahweh lives, I will say what my God says.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_14">14&#160;</span>When he had come to the king, the king said to him, “Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth Gilead to battle, or shall I forbear?” </div>
<div class='p'>He said, “Go up, and prosper. They shall be delivered into your hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_15">15&#160;</span>The king said to him, “How many times shall I adjure you that you speak to me nothing but the truth in Yahweh’s name?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_16">16&#160;</span>He said, “I saw all Israel scattered on the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. Yahweh said, ‘These have no master. Let them each return to his house in peace.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_17">17&#160;</span>The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “Didn’t I tell you that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_18">18&#160;</span>Micaiah said, “Therefore hear Yahweh’s word: I saw Yahweh sitting on his throne, and all the army of heaven standing on his right hand and on his left. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh said, ‘Who will entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth Gilead?’ One spoke saying in this way, and another saying in that way. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_20">20&#160;</span>A spirit came out, stood before Yahweh, and said, ‘I will entice him.’ </div>
<div class='p'>“Yahweh said to him, ‘How?’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_21">21&#160;</span>“He said, ‘I will go, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets.’ </div>
<div class='p'>“He said, ‘You will entice him, and will prevail also. Go and do so.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_22">22&#160;</span>“Now therefore, behold, Yahweh has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these your prophets; and Yahweh has spoken evil concerning you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_23">23&#160;</span>Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and struck Micaiah on the cheek, and said, “Which way did Yahweh’s Spirit go from me to speak to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_24">24&#160;</span>Micaiah said, “Behold, you shall see on that day, when you go into an inner room to hide yourself.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_25">25&#160;</span>The king of Israel said, “Take Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king’s son; 
<span class="verse" id="R218_26">26&#160;</span>and say, ‘The king says, “Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_27">27&#160;</span>Micaiah said, “If you return at all in peace, Yahweh has not spoken by me.” He said, “Listen, you people, all of you!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_28">28&#160;</span>So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth Gilead. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_29">29&#160;</span>The king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, “I will disguise myself, and go into the battle; but you put on your robes.” So the king of Israel disguised himself; and they went into the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_30">30&#160;</span>Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his chariots, saying, “Don’t fight with small nor great, except only with the king of Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R218_31">31&#160;</span>When the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, they said, “It is the king of Israel!” Therefore they turned around to fight against him. But Jehoshaphat cried out, and Yahweh helped him; and God moved them to depart from him. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_32">32&#160;</span>When the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back from pursuing him. 
<span class="verse" id="R218_33">33&#160;</span>A certain man drew his bow at random, and struck the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore he said to the driver of the chariot, “Turn around and carry me out of the battle, for I am severely wounded.” 
<span class="verse" id="R218_34">34&#160;</span>The battle increased that day. However, the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the evening; and at about sunset, he died.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R219_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_1">1&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_2">2&#160;</span>Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, “Should you help the wicked, and love those who hate Yahweh? Because of this, wrath is on you from before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_3">3&#160;</span>Nevertheless there are good things found in you, in that you have put away the Asheroth out of the land, and have set your heart to seek God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_4">4&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat lived at Jerusalem; and he went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill country of Ephraim, and brought them back to Yahweh, the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_5">5&#160;</span>He set judges in the land throughout all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city, 
<span class="verse" id="R219_6">6&#160;</span>and said to the judges, “Consider what you do, for you don’t judge for man, but for Yahweh; and he is with you in the judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_7">7&#160;</span>Now therefore let the fear of Yahweh be on you. Take heed and do it; for there is no iniquity with Yahweh our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R219_8">8&#160;</span>Moreover in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat appointed certain Levites, priests, and heads of the fathers’ households of Israel to give judgment for Yahweh and for controversies. They returned to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_9">9&#160;</span>He commanded them, saying, “You shall do this in the fear of Yahweh, faithfully, and with a perfect heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_10">10&#160;</span>Whenever any controversy comes to you from your brothers who dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and ordinances, you must warn them, that they not be guilty toward Yahweh, and so wrath come on you and on your brothers. Do this, and you will not be guilty. 
<span class="verse" id="R219_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of Yahweh; and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, in all the king’s matters. Also the Levites shall be officers before you. Deal courageously, and may Yahweh be with the good.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R220_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_1">1&#160;</span>After this, the children of Moab, the children of Ammon, and with them some of the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat to battle. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_2">2&#160;</span>Then some came who told Jehoshaphat, saying, “A great multitude is coming against you from beyond the sea from Syria. Behold, they are in Hazazon Tamar” (that is, En Gedi). 
<span class="verse" id="R220_3">3&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat was alarmed, and set himself to seek to Yahweh. He proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_4">4&#160;</span>Judah gathered themselves together to seek help from Yahweh. They came out of all the cities of Judah to seek Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_5">5&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem, in Yahweh’s house, before the new court; 
<span class="verse" id="R220_6">6&#160;</span>and he said, “Yahweh, the God of our fathers, aren’t you God in heaven? Aren’t you ruler over all the kingdoms of the nations? Power and might are in your hand, so that no one is able to withstand you. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_7">7&#160;</span>Didn’t you, our God, drive out the inhabitants of this land before your people Israel, and give it to the offspring<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of Abraham your friend forever? 
<span class="verse" id="R220_8">8&#160;</span>They lived in it, and have built you a sanctuary in it for your name, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R220_9">9&#160;</span>‘If evil comes on us—the sword, judgment, pestilence, or famine—we will stand before this house, and before you (for your name is in this house), and cry to you in our affliction, and you will hear and save.’ 
<span class="verse" id="R220_10">10&#160;</span>Now, behold, the children of Ammon and Moab and Mount Seir, whom you would not let Israel invade when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned away from them, and didn’t destroy them; 
<span class="verse" id="R220_11">11&#160;</span>behold, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of your possession, which you have given us to inherit. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_12">12&#160;</span>Our God, will you not judge them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against us. We don’t know what to do, but our eyes are on you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_13">13&#160;</span>All Judah stood before Yahweh, with their little ones, their wives, and their children. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_14">14&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s Spirit came on Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, in the middle of the assembly; 
<span class="verse" id="R220_15">15&#160;</span>and he said, “Listen, all Judah, and you inhabitants of Jerusalem, and you, king Jehoshaphat. Yahweh says to you, ‘Don’t be afraid, and don’t be dismayed because of this great multitude; for the battle is not yours, but God’s. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_16">16&#160;</span>Tomorrow, go down against them. Behold, they are coming up by the ascent of Ziz. You will find them at the end of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_17">17&#160;</span>You will not need to fight this battle. Set yourselves, stand still, and see the salvation of Yahweh with you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Don’t be afraid, nor be dismayed. Go out against them tomorrow, for Yahweh is with you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_18">18&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground; and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before Yahweh, worshiping Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_19">19&#160;</span>The Levites, of the children of the Kohathites and of the children of the Korahites, stood up to praise Yahweh, the God of Israel, with an exceedingly loud voice. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_20">20&#160;</span>They rose early in the morning and went out into the wilderness of Tekoa. As they went out, Jehoshaphat stood and said, “Listen to me, Judah and you inhabitants of Jerusalem! Believe in Yahweh your God, so you will be established! Believe his prophets, so you will prosper.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_21">21&#160;</span>When he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed those who were to sing to Yahweh and give praise in holy array as they go out before the army, and say, “Give thanks to Yahweh, for his loving kindness endures forever.” 
<span class="verse" id="R220_22">22&#160;</span>When they began to sing and to praise, Yahweh set ambushers against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, who had come against Judah; and they were struck. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_23">23&#160;</span>For the children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of Mount Seir to utterly kill and destroy them. When they had finished the inhabitants of Seir, everyone helped to destroy each other. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_24">24&#160;</span>When Judah came to the place overlooking the wilderness, they looked at the multitude; and behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and there were none who escaped. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_25">25&#160;</span>When Jehoshaphat and his people came to take their plunder, they found among them in abundance both riches and dead bodies with precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away. They took plunder for three days, it was so much. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_26">26&#160;</span>On the fourth day, they assembled themselves in Beracah<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Valley, for there they blessed Yahweh. Therefore the name of that place was called “Beracah Valley” to this day. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_27">27&#160;</span>Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, with Jehoshaphat in front of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; for Yahweh had made them to rejoice over their enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_28">28&#160;</span>They came to Jerusalem with stringed instruments, harps, and trumpets to Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_29">29&#160;</span>The fear of God was on all the kingdoms of the countries when they heard that Yahweh fought against the enemies of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_30">30&#160;</span>So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet, for his God gave him rest all around. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_31">31&#160;</span>So Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he began to reign. He reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_32">32&#160;</span>He walked in the way of Asa his father, and didn’t turn away from it, doing that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_33">33&#160;</span>However the high places were not taken away, and the people had still not set their hearts on the God of their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_34">34&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Jehu the son of Hanani, which is included in the book of the kings of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R220_35">35&#160;</span>After this, Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel. The same did very wickedly. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_36">36&#160;</span>He joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish. They made the ships in Ezion Geber. 
<span class="verse" id="R220_37">37&#160;</span>Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, “Because you have joined yourself with Ahaziah, Yahweh has destroyed your works.” The ships were wrecked, so that they were not able to go to Tarshish.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R221_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_1">1&#160;</span>Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in David’s city; and Jehoram his son reigned in his place. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_2">2&#160;</span>He had brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat: Azariah, Jehiel, Zechariah, Azariah, Michael, and Shephatiah. All these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_3">3&#160;</span>Their father gave them great gifts of silver, of gold, and of precious things, with fortified cities in Judah; but he gave the kingdom to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_4">4&#160;</span>Now when Jehoram had risen up over the kingdom of his father, and had strengthened himself, he killed all his brothers with the sword, and also some of the princes of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_5">5&#160;</span>Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_6">6&#160;</span>He walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did Ahab’s house, for he had Ahab’s daughter as his wife. He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_7">7&#160;</span>However Yahweh would not destroy David’s house, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a lamp to him and to his children always. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_8">8&#160;</span>In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_9">9&#160;</span>Then Jehoram went there with his captains and all his chariots with him. He rose up by night and struck the Edomites who surrounded him, along with the captains of the chariots. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_10">10&#160;</span>So Edom has been in revolt from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time from under his hand, because he had forsaken Yahweh, the God of his fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_11">11&#160;</span>Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and made the inhabitants of Jerusalem play the prostitute, and led Judah astray. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_12">12&#160;</span>A letter came to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, “Yahweh, the God of David your father, says, ‘Because you have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat your father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah, 
<span class="verse" id="R221_13">13&#160;</span>but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the prostitute like Ahab’s house did, and also have slain your brothers of your father’s house, who were better than yourself, 
<span class="verse" id="R221_14">14&#160;</span>behold, Yahweh will strike your people with a great plague, including your children, your wives, and all your possessions; 
<span class="verse" id="R221_15">15&#160;</span>and you will have great sickness with a disease of your bowels, until your bowels fall out by reason of the sickness, day by day.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines and of the Arabians who are beside the Ethiopians; 
<span class="verse" id="R221_17">17&#160;</span>and they came up against Judah, broke into it, and carried away all the possessions that were found in the king’s house, including his sons and his wives, so that there was no son left to him except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R221_18">18&#160;</span>After all this Yahweh struck him in his bowels with an incurable disease. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_19">19&#160;</span>In process of time, at the end of two years, his bowels fell out by reason of his sickness, and he died of severe diseases. His people made no burning for him, like the burning of his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R221_20">20&#160;</span>He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. He departed with no one’s regret. They buried him in David’s city, but not in the tombs of the kings.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R222_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_1">1&#160;</span>The inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his place, because the band of men who came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the oldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_2">2&#160;</span>Ahaziah was forty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_3">3&#160;</span>He also walked in the ways of Ahab’s house, because his mother was his counselor in acting wickedly. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_4">4&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, as did Ahab’s house, for they were his counselors after the death of his father, to his destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_5">5&#160;</span>He also followed their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth Gilead; and the Syrians wounded Joram. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_6">6&#160;</span>He returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which they had given him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. Azariah the son of Jehoram, king of Judah, went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_7">7&#160;</span>Now the destruction of Ahaziah was of God, in that he went to Joram; for when he had come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom Yahweh had anointed to cut off Ahab’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_8">8&#160;</span>When Jehu was executing judgment on Ahab’s house, he found the princes of Judah and the sons of the brothers of Ahaziah serving Ahaziah, and killed them. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_9">9&#160;</span>He sought Ahaziah, and they caught him (now he was hiding in Samaria), and they brought him to Jehu and killed him; and they buried him, for they said, “He is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought Yahweh with all his heart.” The house of Ahaziah had no power to hold the kingdom. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R222_10">10&#160;</span>Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal offspring of the house of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_11">11&#160;</span>But Jehoshabeath, the king’s daughter, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stealthily rescued him from among the king’s sons who were slain, and put him and his nurse in the bedroom. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest (for she was the sister of Ahaziah), hid him from Athaliah, so that she didn’t kill him. 
<span class="verse" id="R222_12">12&#160;</span>He was with them hidden in God’s house six years while Athaliah reigned over the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R223_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_1">1&#160;</span>In the seventh year, Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds—Azariah the son of Jeroham, Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, Azariah the son of Obed, Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri—into a covenant with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_2">2&#160;</span>They went around in Judah and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of fathers’ households of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_3">3&#160;</span>All the assembly made a covenant with the king in God’s house. Jehoiada<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> said to them, “Behold, the king’s son must reign, as Yahweh has spoken concerning the sons of David. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_4">4&#160;</span>This is the thing that you must do: a third part of you, who come in on the Sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be gatekeepers of the thresholds. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_5">5&#160;</span>A third part shall be at the king’s house; and a third part at the gate of the foundation. All the people will be in the courts of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_6">6&#160;</span>But let no one come into Yahweh’s house except the priests and those who minister of the Levites. They shall come in, for they are holy, but all the people shall follow Yahweh’s instructions. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_7">7&#160;</span>The Levites shall surround the king, every man with his weapons in his hand. Whoever comes into the house, let him be slain. Be with the king when he comes in and when he goes out.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_8">8&#160;</span>So the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. They each took his men, those who were to come in on the Sabbath, with those who were to go out on the Sabbath, for Jehoiada the priest didn’t dismiss the shift. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_9">9&#160;</span>Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds the spears, bucklers, and shields that had been king David’s, which were in God’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_10">10&#160;</span>He set all the people, every man with his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, near the altar and the house, around the king. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_11">11&#160;</span>Then they brought out the king’s son, put the crown on him, gave him the covenant, and made him king. Jehoiada and his sons anointed him, and they said, “Long live the king!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_12">12&#160;</span>When Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_13">13&#160;</span>Then she looked, and behold, the king stood by his pillar at the entrance, with the captains and the trumpeters by the king. All the people of the land rejoiced and blew trumpets. The singers also played musical instruments, and led the singing of praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes, and said, “Treason! treason!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_14">14&#160;</span>Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds who were set over the army, and said to them, “Bring her out between the ranks; and whoever follows her, let him be slain with the sword.” For the priest said, “Don’t kill her in Yahweh’s house.” 
<span class="verse" id="R223_15">15&#160;</span>So they made way for her. She went to the entrance of the horse gate to the king’s house; and they killed her there. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R223_16">16&#160;</span>Jehoiada made a covenant between himself, all the people, and the king, that they should be Yahweh’s people. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_17">17&#160;</span>All the people went to the house of Baal, broke it down, broke his altars and his images in pieces, and killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_18">18&#160;</span>Jehoiada appointed the officers of Yahweh’s house under the hand of the Levitical priests, whom David had distributed in Yahweh’s house, to offer the burnt offerings of Yahweh, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as David had ordered. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_19">19&#160;</span>He set the gatekeepers at the gates of Yahweh’s house, that no one who was unclean in anything should enter in. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_20">20&#160;</span>He took the captains of hundreds, the nobles, the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought the king down from Yahweh’s house. They came through the upper gate to the king’s house, and set the king on the throne of the kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="R223_21">21&#160;</span>So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet. They had slain Athaliah with the sword.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R224_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_1">1&#160;</span>Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Zibiah, of Beersheba. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_2">2&#160;</span>Joash did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes all the days of Jehoiada the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_3">3&#160;</span>Jehoiada took for him two wives, and he became the father of sons and daughters. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_4">4&#160;</span>After this, Joash intended to restore Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_5">5&#160;</span>He gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, “Go out to the cities of Judah, and gather money to repair the house of your God from all Israel from year to year. See that you expedite this matter.” However the Levites didn’t do it right away. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_6">6&#160;</span>The king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said to him, “Why haven’t you required of the Levites to bring in the tax of Moses the servant of Yahweh, and of the assembly of Israel, out of Judah and out of Jerusalem, for the Tent of the Testimony?” 
<span class="verse" id="R224_7">7&#160;</span>For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up God’s house; and they also gave all the dedicated things of Yahweh’s house to the Baals. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_8">8&#160;</span>So the king commanded, and they made a chest, and set it outside at the gate of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_9">9&#160;</span>They made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for Yahweh the tax that Moses the servant of God laid on Israel in the wilderness. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_10">10&#160;</span>All the princes and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had filled it. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_11">11&#160;</span>Whenever the chest was brought to the king’s officers by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king’s scribe and the chief priest’s officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to its place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_12">12&#160;</span>The king and Jehoiada gave it to those who did the work of the service of Yahweh’s house. They hired masons and carpenters to restore Yahweh’s house, and also those who worked iron and bronze to repair Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_13">13&#160;</span>So the workmen worked, and the work of repairing went forward in their hands. They set up God’s house as it was designed, and strengthened it. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_14">14&#160;</span>When they had finished, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, from which were made vessels for Yahweh’s house, even vessels with which to minister and to offer, including spoons and vessels of gold and silver. They offered burnt offerings in Yahweh’s house continually all the days of Jehoiada. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_15">15&#160;</span>But Jehoiada grew old and was full of days, and he died. He was one hundred thirty years old when he died. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_16">16&#160;</span>They buried him in David’s city among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and his house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_17">17&#160;</span>Now after the death of Jehoiada, the princes of Judah came and bowed down to the king. Then the king listened to them. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_18">18&#160;</span>They abandoned the house of Yahweh, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherah poles and the idols, so wrath came on Judah and Jerusalem for this their guiltiness. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_19">19&#160;</span>Yet he sent prophets to them to bring them again to Yahweh, and they testified against them; but they would not listen. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_20">20&#160;</span>The Spirit of God came on Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest; and he stood above the people, and said to them, “God says, ‘Why do you disobey Yahweh’s commandments, so that you can’t prosper? Because you have forsaken Yahweh, he has also forsaken you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_21">21&#160;</span>They conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_22">22&#160;</span>Thus Joash the king didn’t remember the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but killed his son. When he died, he said, “May Yahweh look at it, and repay it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_23">23&#160;</span>At the end of the year, the army of the Syrians came up against him. They came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the princes of the people from among the people, and sent all their plunder to the king of Damascus. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_24">24&#160;</span>For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men; and Yahweh delivered a very great army into their hand, because they had forsaken Yahweh, the God of their fathers. So they executed judgment on Joash. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R224_25">25&#160;</span>When they had departed from him (for they left him seriously wounded), his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and killed him on his bed, and he died. They buried him in David’s city, but they didn’t bury him in the tombs of the kings. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_26">26&#160;</span>These are those who conspired against him: Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess. 
<span class="verse" id="R224_27">27&#160;</span>Now concerning his sons, the greatness of the burdens laid on him, and the rebuilding of God’s house, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of the kings. Amaziah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R225_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_1">1&#160;</span>Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jehoaddan, of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, but not with a perfect heart. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_3">3&#160;</span>Now when the kingdom was established to him, he killed his servants who had killed his father the king. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_4">4&#160;</span>But he didn’t put their children to death, but did according to that which is written in the law in the book of Moses, as Yahweh commanded, saying, “The fathers shall not die for the children, neither shall the children die for the fathers; but every man shall die for his own sin.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together and ordered them according to their fathers’ houses, under captains of thousands and captains of hundreds, even all Judah and Benjamin. He counted them from twenty years old and upward, and found that there were three hundred thousand chosen men, able to go out to war, who could handle spear and shield. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_6">6&#160;</span>He also hired one hundred thousand mighty men of valor out of Israel for one hundred talents<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_7">7&#160;</span>A man of God came to him, saying, “O king, don’t let the army of Israel go with you, for Yahweh is not with Israel, with all the children of Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_8">8&#160;</span>But if you will go, take action, and be strong for the battle. God will overthrow you before the enemy; for God has power to help, and to overthrow.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_9">9&#160;</span>Amaziah said to the man of God, “But what shall we do for the hundred talents<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> which I have given to the army of Israel?” </div>
<div class='p'>The man of God answered, “Yahweh is able to give you much more than this.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_10">10&#160;</span>Then Amaziah separated them, the army that had come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again. Therefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in fierce anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_11">11&#160;</span>Amaziah took courage, and led his people out and went to the Valley of Salt, and struck ten thousand of the children of Seir. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_12">12&#160;</span>The children of Judah carried away ten thousand alive, and brought them to the top of the rock, and threw them down from the top of the rock, so that they all were broken in pieces. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_13">13&#160;</span>But the men of the army whom Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell on the cities of Judah from Samaria even to Beth Horon, and struck of them three thousand, and took much plunder. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_14">14&#160;</span>Now after Amaziah had come from the slaughter of the Edomites, he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them and burned incense to them. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh’s anger burned against Amaziah, and he sent to him a prophet who said to him, “Why have you sought after the gods of the people, which have not delivered their own people out of your hand?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_16">16&#160;</span>As he talked with him, the king said to him, “Have we made you one of the king’s counselors? Stop! Why should you be struck down?” </div>
<div class='p'>Then the prophet stopped, and said, “I know that God has determined to destroy you, because you have done this and have not listened to my counsel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_17">17&#160;</span>Then Amaziah king of Judah consulted his advisers, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, “Come! Let’s look one another in the face.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_18">18&#160;</span>Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, “The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, ‘Give your daughter to my son as his wife. Then a wild animal that was in Lebanon passed by and trampled down the thistle. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_19">19&#160;</span>You say to yourself that you have struck Edom; and your heart lifts you up to boast. Now stay at home. Why should you meddle with trouble, that you should fall, even you and Judah with you?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_20">20&#160;</span>But Amaziah would not listen; for it was of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they had sought after the gods of Edom. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_21">21&#160;</span>So Joash king of Israel went up, and he and Amaziah king of Judah looked one another in the face at Beth Shemesh, which belongs to Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_22">22&#160;</span>Judah was defeated by Israel; so every man fled to his tent. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_23">23&#160;</span>Joash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth Shemesh and brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R225_24">24&#160;</span>He took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in God’s house with Obed-Edom, and the treasures of the king’s house, and the hostages, and returned to Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R225_25">25&#160;</span>Amaziah the son of Joash, king of Judah, lived for fifteen years after the death of Joash, son of Jehoahaz, king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_26">26&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, aren’t they written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel? 
<span class="verse" id="R225_27">27&#160;</span>Now from the time that Amaziah turned away from following Yahweh, they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem. He fled to Lachish, but they sent after him to Lachish and killed him there. 
<span class="verse" id="R225_28">28&#160;</span>They brought him on horses and buried him with his fathers in the City of Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R226_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_1">1&#160;</span>All the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the place of his father Amaziah. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_2">2&#160;</span>He built Eloth and restored it to Judah. After that the king slept with his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_3">3&#160;</span>Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign; and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jechiliah, of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_4">4&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, according to all that his father Amaziah had done. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_5">5&#160;</span>He set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the vision of God; and as long as he sought Yahweh, God made him prosper. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_6">6&#160;</span>He went out and fought against the Philistines, and broke down the wall of Gath, the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod; and he built cities in the country of Ashdod, and among the Philistines. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_7">7&#160;</span>God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians who lived in Gur Baal, and the Meunim. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_8">8&#160;</span>The Ammonites gave tribute to Uzziah. His name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt, for he grew exceedingly strong. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_9">9&#160;</span>Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_10">10&#160;</span>He built towers in the wilderness, and dug out many cisterns, for he had much livestock, both in the lowlands and in the plains. He had farmers and vineyard keepers in the mountains and in the fruitful fields, for he loved farming. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_11">11&#160;</span>Moreover Uzziah had an army of fighting men who went out to war by bands, according to the number of their reckoning made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king’s captains. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_12">12&#160;</span>The whole number of the heads of fathers’ households, even the mighty men of valor, was two thousand six hundred. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_13">13&#160;</span>Under their hand was an army, three hundred seven thousand five hundred, who made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_14">14&#160;</span>Uzziah prepared for them, even for all the army, shields, spears, helmets, coats of mail, bows, and stones for slinging. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_15">15&#160;</span>In Jerusalem, he made devices, invented by skillful men, to be on the towers and on the battlements, with which to shoot arrows and great stones. His name spread far abroad, because he was marvelously helped until he was strong. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_16">16&#160;</span>But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up, so that he did corruptly and he trespassed against Yahweh his God, for he went into Yahweh’s temple to burn incense on the altar of incense. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_17">17&#160;</span>Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him eighty priests of Yahweh, who were valiant men. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_18">18&#160;</span>They resisted Uzziah the king, and said to him, “It isn’t for you, Uzziah, to burn incense to Yahweh, but for the priests the sons of Aaron, who are consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary, for you have trespassed. It will not be for your honor from Yahweh God.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_19">19&#160;</span>Then Uzziah was angry. He had a censer in his hand to burn incense, and while he was angry with the priests, the leprosy broke out on his forehead before the priests in Yahweh’s house, beside the altar of incense. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_20">20&#160;</span>Azariah the chief priest and all the priests looked at him, and behold, he was leprous in his forehead; and they thrust him out quickly from there. Indeed, he himself also hurried to go out, because Yahweh had struck him. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_21">21&#160;</span>Uzziah the king was a leper to the day of his death, and lived in a separate house, being a leper; for he was cut off from Yahweh’s house. Jotham his son was over the king’s house, judging the people of the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R226_22">22&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, wrote. 
<span class="verse" id="R226_23">23&#160;</span>So Uzziah slept with his fathers; and they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged to the kings, for they said, “He is a leper.” Jotham his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R227_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R227_1">1&#160;</span>Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, according to all that his father Uzziah had done. However he didn’t enter into Yahweh’s temple. The people still acted corruptly. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_3">3&#160;</span>He built the upper gate of Yahweh’s house, and he built much on the wall of Ophel. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_4">4&#160;</span>Moreover he built cities in the hill country of Judah, and in the forests he built fortresses and towers. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_5">5&#160;</span>He also fought with the king of the children of Ammon, and prevailed against them. The children of Ammon gave him the same year one hundred talents<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of silver, ten thousand cors<a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of wheat, and ten thousand cors of barley.<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> The children of Ammon also gave that much to him in the second year, and in the third. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_6">6&#160;</span>So Jotham became mighty, because he ordered his ways before Yahweh his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_7">7&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars and his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_8">8&#160;</span>He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R227_9">9&#160;</span>Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in David’s city; and Ahaz his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R228_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_1">1&#160;</span>Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. He didn’t do that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, like David his father, 
<span class="verse" id="R228_2">2&#160;</span>but he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and also made molten images for the Baals. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_3">3&#160;</span>Moreover he burned incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burned his children in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_4">4&#160;</span>He sacrificed and burned incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_5">5&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria. They struck him, and carried away from him a great multitude of captives, and brought them to Damascus. He was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who struck him with a great slaughter. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_6">6&#160;</span>For Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in Judah one hundred twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men, because they had forsaken Yahweh, the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_7">7&#160;</span>Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the king’s son, Azrikam the ruler of the house, and Elkanah who was next to the king. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_8">8&#160;</span>The children of Israel carried away captive of their brothers two hundred thousand women, sons, and daughters, and also took away much plunder from them, and brought the plunder to Samaria. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_9">9&#160;</span>But a prophet of Yahweh was there, whose name was Oded; and he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria, and said to them, “Behold, because Yahweh, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand, and you have slain them in a rage which has reached up to heaven. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_10">10&#160;</span>Now you intend to degrade the children of Judah and Jerusalem as male and female slaves for yourselves. Aren’t there even with you trespasses of your own against Yahweh your God? 
<span class="verse" id="R228_11">11&#160;</span>Now hear me therefore, and send back the captives that you have taken captive from your brothers, for the fierce wrath of Yahweh is on you.” 
<span class="verse" id="R228_12">12&#160;</span>Then some of the heads of the children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against those who came from the war, 
<span class="verse" id="R228_13">13&#160;</span>and said to them, “You must not bring in the captives here, for you intend that which will bring on us a trespass against Yahweh, to add to our sins and to our guilt; for our guilt is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_14">14&#160;</span>So the armed men left the captives and the plunder before the princes and all the assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_15">15&#160;</span>The men who have been mentioned by name rose up and took the captives, and with the plunder clothed all who were naked among them, dressed them, gave them sandals, gave them something to eat and to drink, anointed them, carried all the feeble of them on donkeys, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_16">16&#160;</span>At that time king Ahaz sent to the kings of Assyria to help him. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_17">17&#160;</span>For again the Edomites had come and struck Judah, and carried away captives. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_18">18&#160;</span>The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the lowland and of the South of Judah, and had taken Beth Shemesh, Aijalon, Gederoth, Soco with its villages, Timnah with its villages, and also Gimzo and its villages; and they lived there. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_19">19&#160;</span>For Yahweh brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel, because he acted without restraint in Judah and trespassed severely against Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_20">20&#160;</span>Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came to him and gave him trouble, but didn’t strengthen him. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_21">21&#160;</span>For Ahaz took away a portion out of Yahweh’s house, and out of the house of the king and of the princes, and gave it to the king of Assyria; but it didn’t help him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_22">22&#160;</span>In the time of his distress, he trespassed yet more against Yahweh, this same king Ahaz. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_23">23&#160;</span>For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus which had defeated him. He said, “Because the gods of the kings of Syria helped them, I will sacrifice to them, that they may help me.” But they were the ruin of him and of all Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_24">24&#160;</span>Ahaz gathered together the vessels of God’s house, cut the vessels of God’s house in pieces, and shut up the doors of Yahweh’s house; and he made himself altars in every corner of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_25">25&#160;</span>In every city of Judah he made high places to burn incense to other gods, and provoked Yahweh, the God of his fathers, to anger. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R228_26">26&#160;</span>Now the rest of his acts, and all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R228_27">27&#160;</span>Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem, because they didn’t bring him into the tombs of the kings of Israel; and Hezekiah his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R229_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_1">1&#160;</span>Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. His mother’s name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, according to all that David his father had done. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_3">3&#160;</span>In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of Yahweh’s house and repaired them. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_4">4&#160;</span>He brought in the priests and the Levites and gathered them together into the wide place on the east, 
<span class="verse" id="R229_5">5&#160;</span>and said to them, “Listen to me, you Levites! Now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify the house of Yahweh, the God of your fathers, and carry the filthiness out of the holy place. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_6">6&#160;</span>For our fathers were unfaithful, and have done that which was evil in Yahweh our God’s sight, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of Yahweh, and turned their backs. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_7">7&#160;</span>Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh’s wrath was on Judah and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them to be tossed back and forth, to be an astonishment and a hissing, as you see with your eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_9">9&#160;</span>For behold, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_10">10&#160;</span>Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with Yahweh, the God of Israel, that his fierce anger may turn away from us. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_11">11&#160;</span>My sons, don’t be negligent now; for Yahweh has chosen you to stand before him, to minister to him, and that you should be his ministers and burn incense.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_12">12&#160;</span>Then the Levites arose: Mahath, the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites; and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehallelel; and of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah; 
<span class="verse" id="R229_13">13&#160;</span>and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel; and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah; 
<span class="verse" id="R229_14">14&#160;</span>and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei; and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_15">15&#160;</span>They gathered their brothers, sanctified themselves, and went in, according to the commandment of the king by Yahweh’s words, to cleanse Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_16">16&#160;</span>The priests went into the inner part of Yahweh’s house to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in Yahweh’s temple into the court of Yahweh’s house. The Levites took it from there to carry it out to the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_17">17&#160;</span>Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month they came to Yahweh’s porch. They sanctified Yahweh’s house in eight days, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they finished. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_18">18&#160;</span>Then they went in to Hezekiah the king within the palace and said, “We have cleansed all Yahweh’s house, including the altar of burnt offering with all its vessels, and the table of show bread with all its vessels. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_19">19&#160;</span>Moreover, we have prepared and sanctified all the vessels which king Ahaz threw away in his reign when he was unfaithful. Behold, they are before Yahweh’s altar.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_20">20&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah the king arose early, gathered the princes of the city, and went up to Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_21">21&#160;</span>They brought seven bulls, seven rams, seven lambs, and seven male goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah. He commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on Yahweh’s altar. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_22">22&#160;</span>So they killed the bulls, and the priests received the blood and sprinkled it on the altar. They killed the rams and sprinkled the blood on the altar. They also killed the lambs and sprinkled the blood on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_23">23&#160;</span>They brought near the male goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly; and they laid their hands on them. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_24">24&#160;</span>Then the priests killed them, and they made a sin offering with their blood on the altar, to make atonement for all Israel; for the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_25">25&#160;</span>He set the Levites in Yahweh’s house with cymbals, with stringed instruments, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, of Gad the king’s seer, and Nathan the prophet; for the commandment was from Yahweh by his prophets. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_26">26&#160;</span>The Levites stood with David’s instruments, and the priests with the trumpets. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_27">27&#160;</span>Hezekiah commanded them to offer the burnt offering on the altar. When the burnt offering began, Yahweh’s song also began, along with the trumpets and instruments of David king of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_28">28&#160;</span>All the assembly worshiped, the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded. All this continued until the burnt offering was finished. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_29">29&#160;</span>When they had finished offering, the king and all who were present with him bowed themselves and worshiped. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_30">30&#160;</span>Moreover Hezekiah the king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praises to Yahweh with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. They sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshiped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R229_31">31&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah answered, “Now you have consecrated yourselves to Yahweh. Come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into Yahweh’s house.” The assembly brought in sacrifices and thank offerings, and as many as were of a willing heart brought burnt offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_32">32&#160;</span>The number of the burnt offerings which the assembly brought was seventy bulls, one hundred rams, and two hundred lambs. All these were for a burnt offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_33">33&#160;</span>The consecrated things were six hundred head of cattle and three thousand sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_34">34&#160;</span>But the priests were too few, so that they could not skin all the burnt offerings. Therefore their brothers the Levites helped them until the work was ended, and until the priests had sanctified themselves, for the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_35">35&#160;</span>Also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings and with the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of Yahweh’s house was set in order. 
<span class="verse" id="R229_36">36&#160;</span>Hezekiah and all the people rejoiced because of that which God had prepared for the people; for the thing was done suddenly.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R230_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_1">1&#160;</span>Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to Yahweh’s house at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover to Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_2">2&#160;</span>For the king had taken counsel with his princes and all the assembly in Jerusalem to keep the Passover in the second month. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_3">3&#160;</span>For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number, and the people had not gathered themselves together to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_4">4&#160;</span>The thing was right in the eyes of the king and of all the assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_5">5&#160;</span>So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the Passover to Yahweh, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem, for they had not kept it in great numbers in the way it is written. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_6">6&#160;</span>So the couriers went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, according to the commandment of the king, saying, “You children of Israel, turn again to Yahweh, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that he may return to the remnant of you that have escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t be like your fathers and like your brothers, who trespassed against Yahweh, the God of their fathers, so that he gave them up to desolation, as you see. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_8">8&#160;</span>Now don’t be stiff-necked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves to Yahweh, and enter into his sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever, and serve Yahweh your God, that his fierce anger may turn away from you. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_9">9&#160;</span>For if you turn again to Yahweh, your brothers and your children will find compassion with those who led them captive, and will come again into this land, because Yahweh your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you if you return to him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_10">10&#160;</span>So the couriers passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even to Zebulun, but people ridiculed them and mocked them. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_11">11&#160;</span>Nevertheless some men of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_12">12&#160;</span>Also the hand of God came on Judah to give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the princes by Yahweh’s word. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_13">13&#160;</span>Many people assembled at Jerusalem to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great assembly. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_14">14&#160;</span>They arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and they took away all the altars for incense and threw them into the brook Kidron. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_15">15&#160;</span>Then they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the second month. The priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought burnt offerings into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_16">16&#160;</span>They stood in their place after their order, according to the law of Moses the man of God. The priests sprinkled the blood which they received of the hand of the Levites. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_17">17&#160;</span>For there were many in the assembly who had not sanctified themselves; therefore the Levites were in charge of killing the Passovers for everyone who was not clean, to sanctify them to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_18">18&#160;</span>For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim, Manasseh, Issachar, and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet they ate the Passover other than the way it is written. For Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying, “May the good Yahweh pardon everyone 
<span class="verse" id="R230_19">19&#160;</span>who sets his heart to seek God, Yahweh, the God of his fathers, even if they aren’t clean according to the purification of the sanctuary.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh listened to Hezekiah, and healed the people. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_21">21&#160;</span>The children of Israel who were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness. The Levites and the priests praised Yahweh day by day, singing with loud instruments to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_22">22&#160;</span>Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all the Levites who had good understanding in the service of Yahweh. So they ate throughout the feast for the seven days, offering sacrifices of peace offerings and making confession to Yahweh, the God of their fathers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R230_23">23&#160;</span>The whole assembly took counsel to keep another seven days, and they kept another seven days with gladness. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_24">24&#160;</span>For Hezekiah king of Judah gave to the assembly for offerings one thousand bulls and seven thousand sheep; and the princes gave to the assembly a thousand bulls and ten thousand sheep; and a great number of priests sanctified themselves. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_25">25&#160;</span>All the assembly of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the assembly who came out of Israel, and the foreigners who came out of the land of Israel and who lived in Judah, rejoiced. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_26">26&#160;</span>So there was great joy in Jerusalem; for since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was nothing like this in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R230_27">27&#160;</span>Then the Levitical priests arose and blessed the people. Their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy habitation, even to heaven.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R231_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_1">1&#160;</span>Now when all this was finished, all Israel who were present went out to the cities of Judah and broke the pillars in pieces, cut down the Asherah poles, and broke down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, also in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the children of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_2">2&#160;</span>Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and the Levites after their divisions, every man according to his service, both the priests and the Levites, for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of Yahweh’s camp. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_3">3&#160;</span>He also appointed the king’s portion of his possessions for the burnt offerings: for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the Sabbaths, for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in Yahweh’s law. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_4">4&#160;</span>Moreover he commanded the people who lived in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might give themselves to Yahweh’s law. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_5">5&#160;</span>As soon as the commandment went out, the children of Israel gave in abundance the first fruits of grain, new wine, oil, honey, and of all the increase of the field; and they brought in the tithe of all things abundantly. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_6">6&#160;</span>The children of Israel and Judah, who lived in the cities of Judah, also brought in the tithe of cattle and sheep, and the tithe of dedicated things which were consecrated to Yahweh their God, and laid them in heaps. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_7">7&#160;</span>In the third month, they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_8">8&#160;</span>When Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps, they blessed Yahweh and his people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_9">9&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites about the heaps. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_10">10&#160;</span>Azariah the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, answered him and said, “Since people began to bring the offerings into Yahweh’s house, we have eaten and had enough, and have plenty left over, for Yahweh has blessed his people; and that which is left is this great store.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_11">11&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah commanded them to prepare rooms in Yahweh’s house, and they prepared them. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_12">12&#160;</span>They brought in the offerings, the tithes, and the dedicated things faithfully. Conaniah the Levite was ruler over them, and Shimei his brother was second. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_13">13&#160;</span>Jehiel, Azaziah, Nahath, Asahel, Jerimoth, Jozabad, Eliel, Ismachiah, Mahath, and Benaiah were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king and Azariah the ruler of God’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_14">14&#160;</span>Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the gatekeeper at the east gate, was over the free will offerings of God, to distribute Yahweh’s offerings and the most holy things. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_15">15&#160;</span>Under him were Eden, Miniamin, Jeshua, Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to give to their brothers by divisions, to the great as well as to the small; 
<span class="verse" id="R231_16">16&#160;</span>in addition to those who were listed by genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even everyone who entered into Yahweh’s house, as the duty of every day required, for their service in their offices according to their divisions; 
<span class="verse" id="R231_17">17&#160;</span>and those who were listed by genealogy of the priests by their fathers’ houses, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their offices by their divisions; 
<span class="verse" id="R231_18">18&#160;</span>and those who were listed by genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation; for in their office of trust they sanctified themselves in holiness. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_19">19&#160;</span>Also for the sons of Aaron the priests, who were in the fields of the pasture lands of their cities, in every city, there were men who were mentioned by name to give portions to all the males among the priests and to all who were listed by genealogy among the Levites. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R231_20">20&#160;</span>Hezekiah did so throughout all Judah; and he did that which was good, right, and faithful before Yahweh his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R231_21">21&#160;</span>In every work that he began in the service of God’s house, in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart and prospered.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R232_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_1">1&#160;</span>After these things and this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, entered into Judah, encamped against the fortified cities, and intended to win them for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_2">2&#160;</span>When Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib had come, and that he was planning to fight against Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="R232_3">3&#160;</span>he took counsel with his princes and his mighty men to stop the waters of the springs which were outside of the city, and they helped him. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_4">4&#160;</span>Then many people gathered together and they stopped all the springs and the brook that flowed through the middle of the land, saying, “Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find abundant water?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_5">5&#160;</span>He took courage, built up all the wall that was broken down, and raised it up to the towers, with the other wall outside, and strengthened Millo in David’s city, and made weapons and shields in abundance. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_6">6&#160;</span>He set captains of war over the people, gathered them together to him in the wide place at the gate of the city, and spoke encouragingly to them, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R232_7">7&#160;</span>“Be strong and courageous. Don’t be afraid or dismayed because of the king of Assyria, nor for all the multitude who is with him; for there is a greater one with us than with him. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_8">8&#160;</span>An arm of flesh is with him, but Yahweh our God is with us to help us and to fight our battles.” The people rested themselves on the words of Hezekiah king of Judah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_9">9&#160;</span>After this, Sennacherib king of Assyria sent his servants to Jerusalem, (now he was attacking Lachish, and all his forces were with him), to Hezekiah king of Judah, and to all Judah who were at Jerusalem, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R232_10">10&#160;</span>Sennacherib king of Assyria says, “In whom do you trust, that you remain under siege in Jerusalem? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_11">11&#160;</span>Doesn’t Hezekiah persuade you to give you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying, ‘Yahweh our God will deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?’ 
<span class="verse" id="R232_12">12&#160;</span>Hasn’t the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, ‘You shall worship before one altar, and you shall burn incense on it?’ 
<span class="verse" id="R232_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t you know what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of those lands in any way able to deliver their land out of my hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_14">14&#160;</span>Who was there among all the gods of those nations which my fathers utterly destroyed that could deliver his people out of my hand, that your God should be able to deliver you out of my hand? 
<span class="verse" id="R232_15">15&#160;</span>Now therefore don’t let Hezekiah deceive you nor persuade you in this way. Don’t believe him, for no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers. How much less will your God deliver you out of my hand?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_16">16&#160;</span>His servants spoke yet more against Yahweh God and against his servant Hezekiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_17">17&#160;</span>He also wrote letters insulting Yahweh, the God of Israel, and speaking against him, saying, “As the gods of the nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my hand, so shall the God of Hezekiah not deliver his people out of my hand.” 
<span class="verse" id="R232_18">18&#160;</span>They called out with a loud voice in the Jews’ language to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten them and to trouble them, that they might take the city. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_19">19&#160;</span>They spoke of the God of Jerusalem as of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men’s hands. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_20">20&#160;</span>Hezekiah the king and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, prayed because of this, and cried to heaven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh sent an angel, who cut off all the mighty men of valor, the leaders, and captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. When he had come into the house of his god, those who came out of his own body<a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> killed him there with the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_22">22&#160;</span>Thus Yahweh saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria and from the hand of all others, and guided them on every side. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_23">23&#160;</span>Many brought gifts to Yahweh to Jerusalem, and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah, so that he was exalted in the sight of all nations from then on. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_24">24&#160;</span>In those days Hezekiah was terminally ill, and he prayed to Yahweh; and he spoke to him, and gave him a sign. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_25">25&#160;</span>But Hezekiah didn’t reciprocate appropriate to the benefit done for him, because his heart was lifted up. Therefore there was wrath on him, Judah, and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_26">26&#160;</span>However, Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that Yahweh’s wrath didn’t come on them in the days of Hezekiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_27">27&#160;</span>Hezekiah had exceedingly great riches and honor. He provided himself with treasuries for silver, for gold, for precious stones, for spices, for shields, and for all kinds of valuable vessels; 
<span class="verse" id="R232_28">28&#160;</span>also storehouses for the increase of grain, new wine, and oil; and stalls for all kinds of animals, and flocks in folds. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_29">29&#160;</span>Moreover he provided for himself cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance; for God had given him abundant possessions. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_30">30&#160;</span>This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them straight down on the west side of David’s city. Hezekiah prospered in all his works. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_31">31&#160;</span>However, concerning the ambassadors of the princes of Babylon, who sent to him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him to test him, that he might know all that was in his heart. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R232_32">32&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah and his good deeds, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R232_33">33&#160;</span>Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the ascent to the tombs of the sons of David. All Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. Manasseh his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R233_0'>33</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_1">1&#160;</span>Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, after the abominations of the nations whom Yahweh cast out before the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_3">3&#160;</span>For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down; and he raised up altars for the Baals, made Asheroth, and worshiped all the army of the sky, and served them. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_4">4&#160;</span>He built altars in Yahweh’s house, of which Yahweh said, “My name shall be in Jerusalem forever.” 
<span class="verse" id="R233_5">5&#160;</span>He built altars for all the army of the sky in the two courts of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_6">6&#160;</span>He also made his children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom. He practiced sorcery, divination, and witchcraft, and dealt with those who had familiar spirits and with wizards. He did much evil in Yahweh’s sight, to provoke him to anger. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_7">7&#160;</span>He set the engraved image of the idol, which he had made, in God’s house, of which God said to David and to Solomon his son, “In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_8">8&#160;</span>I will not any more remove the foot of Israel from off the land which I have appointed for your fathers, if only they will observe to do all that I have commanded them, even all the law, the statutes, and the ordinances given by Moses.” 
<span class="verse" id="R233_9">9&#160;</span>Manasseh seduced Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that they did more evil than did the nations whom Yahweh destroyed before the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Manasseh and to his people, but they didn’t listen. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh brought on them the captains of the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh in chains, bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_12">12&#160;</span>When he was in distress, he begged Yahweh his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_13">13&#160;</span>He prayed to him; and he was entreated by him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that Yahweh was God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_14">14&#160;</span>Now after this, he built an outer wall to David’s city on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance at the fish gate. He encircled Ophel with it, and raised it up to a very great height; and he put valiant captains in all the fortified cities of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_15">15&#160;</span>He took away the foreign gods and the idol out of Yahweh’s house, and all the altars that he had built in the mountain of Yahweh’s house and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_16">16&#160;</span>He built up Yahweh’s altar, and offered sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving on it, and commanded Judah to serve Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_17">17&#160;</span>Nevertheless the people still sacrificed in the high places, but only to Yahweh their God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_18">18&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel, behold, they are written among the acts of the kings of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_19">19&#160;</span>His prayer also, and how God listened to his request, and all his sin and his trespass, and the places in which he built high places and set up the Asherah poles and the engraved images before he humbled himself: behold, they are written in the history of Hozai.<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="R233_20">20&#160;</span>So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house; and Amon his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R233_21">21&#160;</span>Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign; and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_22">22&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight, as did Manasseh his father; and Amon sacrificed to all the engraved images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_23">23&#160;</span>He didn’t humble himself before Yahweh, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but this same Amon trespassed more and more. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_24">24&#160;</span>His servants conspired against him, and put him to death in his own house. 
<span class="verse" id="R233_25">25&#160;</span>But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R234_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_1">1&#160;</span>Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_2">2&#160;</span>He did that which was right in Yahweh’s eyes, and walked in the ways of David his father, and didn’t turn away to the right hand or to the left. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_3">3&#160;</span>For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father; and in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, the Asherah poles, the engraved images, and the molten images. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_4">4&#160;</span>They broke down the altars of the Baals in his presence; and he cut down the incense altars that were on high above them. He broke the Asherah poles, the engraved images, and the molten images in pieces, made dust of them, and scattered it on the graves of those who had sacrificed to them. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_5">5&#160;</span>He burned the bones of the priests on their altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_6">6&#160;</span>He did this in the cities of Manasseh, Ephraim, and Simeon, even to Naphtali, around in their ruins. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_7">7&#160;</span>He broke down the altars, beat the Asherah poles and the engraved images into powder, and cut down all the incense altars throughout all the land of Israel, then returned to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_8">8&#160;</span>Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder to repair the house of Yahweh his God. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_9">9&#160;</span>They came to Hilkiah the high priest and delivered the money that was brought into God’s house, which the Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had gathered from the hands of Manasseh, Ephraim, of all the remnant of Israel, of all Judah and Benjamin, and of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_10">10&#160;</span>They delivered it into the hands of the workmen who had the oversight of Yahweh’s house; and the workmen who labored in Yahweh’s house gave it to mend and repair the house. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_11">11&#160;</span>They gave it to the carpenters and to the builders to buy cut stone and timber for couplings, and to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_12">12&#160;</span>The men did the work faithfully. Their overseers were Jahath and Obadiah the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to give direction; and others of the Levites, who were all skillful with musical instruments. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_13">13&#160;</span>Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and directed all who did the work in every kind of service. Of the Levites, there were scribes, officials, and gatekeepers. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_14">14&#160;</span>When they brought out the money that was brought into Yahweh’s house, Hilkiah the priest found the book of Yahweh’s law given by Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_15">15&#160;</span>Hilkiah answered Shaphan the scribe, “I have found the book of the law in Yahweh’s house.” So Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_16">16&#160;</span>Shaphan carried the book to the king, and moreover brought back word to the king, saying, “All that was committed to your servants, they are doing. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_17">17&#160;</span>They have emptied out the money that was found in Yahweh’s house, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers and into the hand of the workmen.” 
<span class="verse" id="R234_18">18&#160;</span>Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, “Hilkiah the priest has delivered me a book.” Shaphan read from it to the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_19">19&#160;</span>When the king had heard the words of the law, he tore his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_20">20&#160;</span>The king commanded Hilkiah, Ahikam the son of Shaphan, Abdon the son of Micah, Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king’s servant, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R234_21">21&#160;</span>“Go inquire of Yahweh for me, and for those who are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found; for great is Yahweh’s wrath that is poured out on us, because our fathers have not kept Yahweh’s word, to do according to all that is written in this book.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_22">22&#160;</span>So Hilkiah and those whom the king had commanded went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe (now she lived in Jerusalem in the second quarter), and they spoke to her to that effect. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_23">23&#160;</span>She said to them, “Yahweh, the God of Israel says: ‘Tell the man who sent you to me, 
<span class="verse" id="R234_24">24&#160;</span>“Yahweh says, ‘Behold, I will bring evil on this place and on its inhabitants, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_25">25&#160;</span>Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands, therefore my wrath is poured out on this place, and it will not be quenched.’ ” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="R234_26">26&#160;</span>But to the king of Judah, who sent you to inquire of Yahweh, you shall tell him this, ‘Yahweh, the God of Israel says: “About the words which you have heard, 
<span class="verse" id="R234_27">27&#160;</span>because your heart was tender, and you humbled yourself before God when you heard his words against this place and against its inhabitants, and have humbled yourself before me, and have torn your clothes and wept before me, I also have heard you,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_28">28&#160;</span>“Behold, I will gather you to your fathers, and you will be gathered to your grave in peace. Your eyes won’t see all the evil that I will bring on this place and on its inhabitants.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>They brought back this message to the king. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R234_29">29&#160;</span>Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_30">30&#160;</span>The king went up to Yahweh’s house with all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem—the priests, the Levites, and all the people, both great and small—and he read in their hearing all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_31">31&#160;</span>The king stood in his place and made a covenant before Yahweh, to walk after Yahweh, and to keep his commandments, his testimonies, and his statutes with all his heart and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were written in this book. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_32">32&#160;</span>He caused all who were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand. The inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="R234_33">33&#160;</span>Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that belonged to the children of Israel, and made all who were found in Israel to serve, even to serve Yahweh their God. All his days they didn’t depart from following Yahweh, the God of their fathers.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R235_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_1">1&#160;</span>Josiah kept a Passover to Yahweh in Jerusalem. They killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_2">2&#160;</span>He set the priests in their offices and encouraged them in the service of Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_3">3&#160;</span>He said to the Levites who taught all Israel, who were holy to Yahweh, “Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built. It will no longer be a burden on your shoulders. Now serve Yahweh your God and his people Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_4">4&#160;</span>Prepare yourselves after your fathers’ houses by your divisions, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_5">5&#160;</span>Stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers’ houses of your brothers the children of the people, and let there be for each a portion of a fathers’ house of the Levites. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_6">6&#160;</span>Kill the Passover lamb, sanctify yourselves, and prepare for your brothers, to do according to Yahweh’s word by Moses.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_7">7&#160;</span>Josiah gave to the children of the people, of the flock, lambs and young goats, all of them for the Passover offerings, to all who were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and three thousand bulls. These were of the king’s substance. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_8">8&#160;</span>His princes gave a free will offering to the people, to the priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, the rulers of God’s house, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings two thousand six hundred small livestock, and three hundred head of cattle. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_9">9&#160;</span>Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brothers, and Hashabiah, Jeiel, and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the Levites for the Passover offerings five thousand small livestock and five hundred head of cattle. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_10">10&#160;</span>So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites by their divisions, according to the king’s commandment. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_11">11&#160;</span>They killed the Passover lambs, and the priests sprinkled the blood which they received from their hands, and the Levites skinned them. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_12">12&#160;</span>They removed the burnt offerings, that they might give them according to the divisions of the fathers’ houses of the children of the people, to offer to Yahweh, as it is written in the book of Moses. They did the same with the cattle. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_13">13&#160;</span>They roasted the Passover with fire according to the ordinance. They boiled the holy offerings in pots, in cauldrons, and in pans, and carried them quickly to all the children of the people. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_14">14&#160;</span>Afterward they prepared for themselves and for the priests, because the priests the sons of Aaron were busy with offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night. Therefore the Levites prepared for themselves and for the priests the sons of Aaron. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_15">15&#160;</span>The singers, the sons of Asaph, were in their place, according to the commandment of David, Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun the king’s seer; and the gatekeepers were at every gate. They didn’t need to depart from their service, because their brothers the Levites prepared for them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_16">16&#160;</span>So all the service of Yahweh was prepared the same day, to keep the Passover, and to offer burnt offerings on Yahweh’s altar, according to the commandment of king Josiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_17">17&#160;</span>The children of Israel who were present kept the Passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_18">18&#160;</span>There was no Passover like that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet, nor did any of the kings of Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah kept—with the priests, the Levites, and all Judah and Israel who were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_19">19&#160;</span>This Passover was kept in the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_20">20&#160;</span>After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight against Carchemish by the Euphrates, and Josiah went out against him. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_21">21&#160;</span>But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, “What have I to do with you, you king of Judah? I come not against you today, but against the house with which I have war. God has commanded me to make haste. Beware that it is God who is with me, that he not destroy you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_22">22&#160;</span>Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and didn’t listen to the words of Neco from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_23">23&#160;</span>The archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his servants, “Take me away, because I am seriously wounded!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R235_24">24&#160;</span>So his servants took him out of the chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had, and brought him to Jerusalem; and he died, and was buried in the tombs of his fathers. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_25">25&#160;</span>Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day; and they made them an ordinance in Israel. Behold, they are written in the lamentations. 
<span class="verse" id="R235_26">26&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Josiah and his good deeds, according to that which is written in Yahweh’s law, 
<span class="verse" id="R235_27">27&#160;</span>and his acts, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='R236_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_1">1&#160;</span>Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father’s place in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_2">2&#160;</span>Joahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign; and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_3">3&#160;</span>The king of Egypt removed him from office at Jerusalem, and fined the land one hundred talents of silver and a talent<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of gold. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_4">4&#160;</span>The king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. Neco took Joahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_5">5&#160;</span>Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. He did that which was evil in Yahweh his God’s sight. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_6">6&#160;</span>Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against him, and bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_7">7&#160;</span>Nebuchadnezzar also carried some of the vessels of Yahweh’s house to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_8">8&#160;</span>Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah; and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_9">9&#160;</span>Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem. He did that which was evil in Yahweh’s sight. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_10">10&#160;</span>At the return of the year, king Nebuchadnezzar sent and brought him to Babylon, with the valuable vessels of Yahweh’s house, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_11">11&#160;</span>Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_12">12&#160;</span>He did that which was evil in Yahweh his God’s sight. He didn’t humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from Yahweh’s mouth. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_13">13&#160;</span>He also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God; but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart against turning to Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_14">14&#160;</span>Moreover all the chiefs of the priests and the people trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of the nations; and they polluted Yahweh’s house which he had made holy in Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh, the God of their fathers, sent to them by his messengers, rising up early and sending, because he had compassion on his people and on his dwelling place; 
<span class="verse" id="R236_16">16&#160;</span>but they mocked the messengers of God, despised his words, and scoffed at his prophets, until Yahweh’s wrath arose against his people, until there was no remedy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore he brought on them the king of the Chaldeans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion on young man or virgin, old man or infirm. He gave them all into his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_18">18&#160;</span>All the vessels of God’s house, great and small, and the treasures of Yahweh’s house, and the treasures of the king and of his princes, all these he brought to Babylon. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_19">19&#160;</span>They burned God’s house, broke down the wall of Jerusalem, burned all its palaces with fire, and destroyed all of its valuable vessels. 
<span class="verse" id="R236_20">20&#160;</span>He carried those who had escaped from the sword away to Babylon, and they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia, 
<span class="verse" id="R236_21">21&#160;</span>to fulfill Yahweh’s word by Jeremiah’s mouth, until the land had enjoyed its Sabbaths. As long as it lay desolate, it kept Sabbath, to fulfill seventy years. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="R236_22">22&#160;</span>Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that Yahweh’s word by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Yahweh stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="R236_23">23&#160;</span>“Cyrus king of Persia says, ‘Yahweh, the God of heaven, has given all the kingdoms of the earth to me; and he has commanded me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, Yahweh his God be with him, and let him go up.’ ” </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R21_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R21_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R21_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The pieces of silver were probably shekels, so 600 pieces would be about 13.2 pounds or 6 kilograms of silver, and 150 would be about 3.3 pounds or 1.5 kilograms of silver.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R21_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:17</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Aramean</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R22_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:4</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R22_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 cor is the same as a homer, or about 55.9 U. S. gallons (liquid) or 211 liters or 6 bushels, so 20,000 cors of wheat would weigh about 545 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R22_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 bath is one tenth of a cor, or about 5.6 U. S. gallons or 21 liters or 2.4 pecks. 20,000 baths of barley would weigh about 262 metric tons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R22_13"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Huram, my father</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R23_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:3</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R23_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 3:8</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so 600 talents is about 18 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R23_9"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 3:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.32 Troy ounces, so 50 shekels was about 0.5 kilograms or about 16 Troy ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R24_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:1</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R24_2"><span class="notemark">†</span> 4:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, pool, or, reservoir</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R24_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 4:5</a>
 <span class="ft">A bath is about 5.6 U. S. gallons or 21.1 liters, so 3,000 baths is about 16,800 gallons or 63.3 kiloliters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R24_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 4:16</a>
 <span class="ft">“abi” means “his father”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R26_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:13</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R28_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:13</a>
 <span class="ft">or, feast of tents (Sukkot)</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R28_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8:18</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so 450 talents is about 13.5 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:4</a>
 <span class="ft">or, she was breathless.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so 120 talents is about 3.6 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:10</a>
 <span class="ft">possibly Indian sandalwood, which has nice grain and a pleasant scent and is good for woodworking</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_13"><span class="notemark">§</span> 9:13</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces, so 666 talents is about 20 metric tons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:15</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.32 Troy ounces, so 600 shekels was about 6 kilograms or about 192 Troy ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R29_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:16</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.32 Troy ounces, so 300 shekels was about 3 kilograms or about 96 Troy ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R220_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:7</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R220_26"><span class="notemark">†</span> 20:26</a>
 <span class="ft">“Beracah” means “blessing”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R223_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:3</a>
 <span class="ft">Hebrew </span><span class="fq">He</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R225_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:6</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R225_9"><span class="notemark">†</span> 25:9</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R225_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 25:23</a>
 <span class="ft">A cubit is the length from the tip of the middle finger to the elbow on a man’s arm, or about 18 inches or 46 centimeters, so 400 cubits is about 200 yards or 184 meters.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R227_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:5</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R227_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 cor is the same as a homer, or about 55.9 U. S. gallons (liquid) or 211 liters or 6 bushels. 10,000 cors of wheat would weigh about 1,640 metric tons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R227_5"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27:5</a>
 <span class="ft">10,000 cors of barley would weigh about 1,310 metric tons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R232_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32:21</a>
 <span class="ft">i.e., his own sons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R233_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 33:19</a>
 <span class="ft">or, the seers</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#R236_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 36:3</a>
 <span class="ft">A talent is about 30 kilograms or 66 pounds or 965 Troy ounces</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
