<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Isaiah 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Isaiah</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS42_0'>42</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS43_0'>43</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS44_0'>44</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS45_0'>45</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS46_0'>46</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS47_0'>47</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS48_0'>48</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS49_0'>49</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS50_0'>50</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS51_0'>51</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS52_0'>52</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS53_0'>53</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS54_0'>54</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS55_0'>55</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS56_0'>56</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS57_0'>57</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS58_0'>58</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS59_0'>59</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS60_0'>60</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS61_0'>61</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS62_0'>62</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS63_0'>63</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS64_0'>64</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS65_0'>65</a></li>
<li><a href='ISA.xhtml#IS66_0'>66</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='IS0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Book of the Prophet </div>
<div class='mt'>Isaiah  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="IS1_1">1&#160;</span>The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_2">2&#160;</span>Hear, heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and listen, earth; for Yahweh<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> has spoken: </div>
<div class='q'>“I have nourished and brought up children </div>
<div class='q2'>and they have rebelled against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_3">3&#160;</span>The ox knows his owner, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the donkey his master’s crib; </div>
<div class='q2'>but Israel doesn’t know. </div>
<div class='q2'>My people don’t consider.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_4">4&#160;</span>Ah sinful nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>a people loaded with iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>offspring<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of evildoers, </div>
<div class='q2'>children who deal corruptly! </div>
<div class='q'>They have forsaken Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have despised the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are estranged and backward. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_5">5&#160;</span>Why should you be beaten more, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you revolt more and more? </div>
<div class='q'>The whole head is sick, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the whole heart faint. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_6">6&#160;</span>From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but wounds, welts, and open sores. </div>
<div class='q2'>They haven’t been closed, bandaged, or soothed with oil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_7">7&#160;</span>Your country is desolate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your cities are burned with fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>Strangers devour your land in your presence </div>
<div class='q2'>and it is desolate, </div>
<div class='q2'>as overthrown by strangers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_8">8&#160;</span>The daughter of Zion is left like a shelter in a vineyard, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a hut in a field of melons, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a besieged city. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_9">9&#160;</span>Unless Yahweh of Armies had left to us a very small remnant, </div>
<div class='q2'>we would have been as Sodom. </div>
<div class='q2'>We would have been like Gomorrah. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_10">10&#160;</span>Hear Yahweh’s word, you rulers of Sodom! </div>
<div class='q2'>Listen to the law of our God,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> you people of Gomorrah! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_11">11&#160;</span>“What are the multitude of your sacrifices to me?”, says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“I have had enough of the burnt offerings of rams </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fat of fed animals. </div>
<div class='q2'>I don’t delight in the blood of bulls, </div>
<div class='q2'>or of lambs, </div>
<div class='q2'>or of male goats. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_12">12&#160;</span>When you come to appear before me, </div>
<div class='q2'>who has required this at your hand, to trample my courts? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_13">13&#160;</span>Bring no more vain offerings. </div>
<div class='q2'>Incense is an abomination to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>New moons, Sabbaths, and convocations— </div>
<div class='q2'>I can’t stand evil assemblies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_14">14&#160;</span>My soul hates your New Moons and your appointed feasts. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are a burden to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am weary of bearing them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_15">15&#160;</span>When you spread out your hands, I will hide my eyes from you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, when you make many prayers, I will not hear. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your hands are full of blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_16">16&#160;</span>Wash yourselves. Make yourself clean. </div>
<div class='q2'>Put away the evil of your doings from before my eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Cease to do evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_17">17&#160;</span>Learn to do well. </div>
<div class='q2'>Seek justice. </div>
<div class='q2'>Relieve the oppressed. </div>
<div class='q'>Defend the fatherless. </div>
<div class='q2'>Plead for the widow.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_18">18&#160;</span>“Come now, and let’s reason together,” says Yahweh: </div>
<div class='q2'>“Though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_19">19&#160;</span>If you are willing and obedient, </div>
<div class='q2'>you will eat the good of the land; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_20">20&#160;</span>but if you refuse and rebel, you will be devoured with the sword; </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh’s mouth has spoken it.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_21">21&#160;</span>How the faithful city has become a prostitute! </div>
<div class='q2'>She was full of justice. </div>
<div class='q'>Righteousness lodged in her, </div>
<div class='q2'>but now there are murderers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_22">22&#160;</span>Your silver has become dross, </div>
<div class='q2'>your wine mixed with water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_23">23&#160;</span>Your princes are rebellious and companions of thieves. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone loves bribes and follows after rewards. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t defend the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does the cause of the widow come to them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord,<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> Yahweh of Armies, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Mighty One of Israel, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Ah, I will get relief from my adversaries, </div>
<div class='q2'>and avenge myself on my enemies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_25">25&#160;</span>I will turn my hand on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>thoroughly purge away your dross, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will take away all your tin.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_26">26&#160;</span>I will restore your judges as at the first, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your counselors as at the beginning. </div>
<div class='q'>Afterward you shall be called ‘The city of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>a faithful town.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_27">27&#160;</span>Zion shall be redeemed with justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her converts with righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_28">28&#160;</span>But the destruction of transgressors and sinners shall be together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who forsake Yahweh shall be consumed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_29">29&#160;</span>For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which you have desired, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you shall be confounded for the gardens that you have chosen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_30">30&#160;</span>For you shall be as an oak whose leaf fades, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a garden that has no water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS1_31">31&#160;</span>The strong will be like tinder, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his work like a spark. </div>
<div class='q'>They will both burn together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one will quench them.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_1">1&#160;</span>This is what Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_2">2&#160;</span>It shall happen in the latter days, that the mountain of Yahweh’s house shall be established on the top of the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shall be raised above the hills; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all nations shall flow to it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_3">3&#160;</span>Many peoples shall go and say, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Come, let’s go up to the mountain of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the house of the God of Jacob; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will teach us of his ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we will walk in his paths.” </div>
<div class='q'>For the law shall go out of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh’s word from Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_4">4&#160;</span>He will judge between the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will decide concerning many peoples. </div>
<div class='q2'>They shall beat their swords into plowshares, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their spears into pruning hooks. </div>
<div class='q'>Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither shall they learn war any more. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_5">5&#160;</span>House of Jacob, come, and let’s walk in the light of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_6">6&#160;</span>For you have forsaken your people, the house of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they are filled from the east, </div>
<div class='q2'>with those who practice divination like the Philistines, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they clasp hands with the children of foreigners. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_7">7&#160;</span>Their land is full of silver and gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is there any end of their treasures. </div>
<div class='q'>Their land also is full of horses, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is there any end of their chariots. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_8">8&#160;</span>Their land also is full of idols. </div>
<div class='q2'>They worship the work of their own hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>that which their own fingers have made. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_9">9&#160;</span>Man is brought low, </div>
<div class='q2'>and mankind is humbled; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore don’t forgive them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_10">10&#160;</span>Enter into the rock, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hide in the dust, </div>
<div class='q'>from before the terror of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the glory of his majesty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_11">11&#160;</span>The lofty looks of man will be brought low, </div>
<div class='q2'>the arrogance of men will be bowed down, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh alone will be exalted in that day. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_12">12&#160;</span>For there will be a day of Yahweh of Armies for all that is proud and arrogant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for all that is lifted up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it shall be brought low— </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_13">13&#160;</span>for all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, </div>
<div class='q2'>for all the oaks of Bashan, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_14">14&#160;</span>for all the high mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>for all the hills that are lifted up, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_15">15&#160;</span>for every lofty tower, </div>
<div class='q2'>for every fortified wall, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_16">16&#160;</span>for all the ships of Tarshish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for all pleasant imagery. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_17">17&#160;</span>The loftiness of man shall be bowed down, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the arrogance of men shall be brought low; </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh alone shall be exalted in that day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_18">18&#160;</span>The idols shall utterly pass away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_19">19&#160;</span>Men shall go into the caves of the rocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and into the holes of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>from before the terror of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the glory of his majesty, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he arises to shake the earth mightily. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_20">20&#160;</span>In that day, men shall cast away their idols of silver </div>
<div class='q2'>and their idols of gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>which have been made for themselves to worship, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the moles and to the bats, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_21">21&#160;</span>to go into the caverns of the rocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and into the clefts of the ragged rocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>from before the terror of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the glory of his majesty, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he arises to shake the earth mightily. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS2_22">22&#160;</span>Stop trusting in man, whose breath is in his nostrils; </div>
<div class='q2'>for of what account is he?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_1">1&#160;</span>For, behold,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, takes away from Jerusalem and from Judah supply and support, </div>
<div class='q2'>the whole supply of bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the whole supply of water; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_2">2&#160;</span>the mighty man, </div>
<div class='q2'>the man of war, </div>
<div class='q2'>the judge, </div>
<div class='q2'>the prophet, </div>
<div class='q2'>the diviner, </div>
<div class='q2'>the elder, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_3">3&#160;</span>the captain of fifty, </div>
<div class='q2'>the honorable man, </div>
<div class='q2'>the counselor, </div>
<div class='q2'>the skilled craftsman, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the clever enchanter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_4">4&#160;</span>I will give boys to be their princes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and children shall rule over them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_5">5&#160;</span>The people will be oppressed, </div>
<div class='q2'>everyone by another, </div>
<div class='q2'>and everyone by his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>The child will behave himself proudly against the old man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wicked against the honorable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_6">6&#160;</span>Indeed a man shall take hold of his brother in the house of his father, saying, </div>
<div class='q2'>“You have clothing, you be our ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let this ruin be under your hand.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_7">7&#160;</span>In that day he will cry out, saying, “I will not be a healer; </div>
<div class='q2'>for in my house is neither bread nor clothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>You shall not make me ruler of the people.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_8">8&#160;</span>For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen; </div>
<div class='q2'>because their tongue and their doings are against Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>to provoke the eyes of his glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_9">9&#160;</span>The look of their faces testify against them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They parade their sin like Sodom. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t hide it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Woe to their soul! </div>
<div class='q2'>For they have brought disaster upon themselves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_10">10&#160;</span>Tell the righteous that it will be well with them, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they will eat the fruit of their deeds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_11">11&#160;</span>Woe to the wicked! </div>
<div class='q2'>Disaster is upon them, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the deeds of their hands will be paid back to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_12">12&#160;</span>As for my people, children are their oppressors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and women rule over them. </div>
<div class='q2'>My people, those who lead you cause you to err, </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroy the way of your paths. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh stands up to contend, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stands to judge the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh will enter into judgment with the elders of his people </div>
<div class='q2'>and their leaders: </div>
<div class='q2'>“It is you who have eaten up the vineyard. </div>
<div class='q2'>The plunder of the poor is in your houses. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_15">15&#160;</span>What do you mean that you crush my people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and grind the face of the poor?” says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_16">16&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh said, “Because the daughters of Zion are arrogant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and walk with outstretched necks and flirting eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>walking daintily as they go, </div>
<div class='q2'>jingling ornaments on their feet; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_17">17&#160;</span>therefore the Lord brings sores on the crown of the head of the women of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh will make their scalps bald.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_18">18&#160;</span>In that day the Lord will take away the beauty of their anklets, the headbands, the crescent necklaces, 
<span class="verse" id="IS3_19">19&#160;</span>the earrings, the bracelets, the veils, 
<span class="verse" id="IS3_20">20&#160;</span>the headdresses, the ankle chains, the sashes, the perfume containers, the charms, 
<span class="verse" id="IS3_21">21&#160;</span>the signet rings, the nose rings, 
<span class="verse" id="IS3_22">22&#160;</span>the fine robes, the capes, the cloaks, the purses, 
<span class="verse" id="IS3_23">23&#160;</span>the hand mirrors, the fine linen garments, the tiaras, and the shawls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_24">24&#160;</span>It shall happen that instead of sweet spices, there shall be rottenness; </div>
<div class='q2'>instead of a belt, a rope; </div>
<div class='q2'>instead of well set hair, baldness; </div>
<div class='q2'>instead of a robe, a wearing of sackcloth; </div>
<div class='q2'>and branding instead of beauty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_25">25&#160;</span>Your men shall fall by the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your mighty in the war. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS3_26">26&#160;</span>Her gates shall lament and mourn. </div>
<div class='q2'>She shall be desolate and sit on the ground.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS4_1">1&#160;</span>Seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying, “We will eat our own bread, and wear our own clothing. Just let us be called by your name. Take away our reproach.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS4_2">2&#160;</span>In that day, Yahweh’s branch will be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the land will be the beauty and glory of the survivors of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS4_3">3&#160;</span>It will happen that he who is left in Zion and he who remains in Jerusalem shall be called holy, even everyone who is written among the living in Jerusalem, 
<span class="verse" id="IS4_4">4&#160;</span>when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from within it, by the spirit of justice and by the spirit of burning. 
<span class="verse" id="IS4_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh will create over the whole habitation of Mount Zion and over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all the glory will be a canopy. 
<span class="verse" id="IS4_6">6&#160;</span>There will be a pavilion for a shade in the daytime from the heat, and for a refuge and for a shelter from storm and from rain.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_1">1&#160;</span>Let me sing for my well beloved a song of my beloved about his vineyard. </div>
<div class='q2'>My beloved had a vineyard on a very fruitful hill. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_2">2&#160;</span>He dug it up, </div>
<div class='q2'>gathered out its stones, </div>
<div class='q2'>planted it with the choicest vine, </div>
<div class='q2'>built a tower in the middle of it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and also cut out a wine press in it. </div>
<div class='q'>He looked for it to yield grapes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it yielded wild grapes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_3">3&#160;</span>“Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, </div>
<div class='q2'>please judge between me and my vineyard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_4">4&#160;</span>What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why, when I looked for it to yield grapes, did it yield wild grapes? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_5">5&#160;</span>Now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will take away its hedge, and it will be eaten up. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will break down its wall, and it will be trampled down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_6">6&#160;</span>I will lay it a wasteland. </div>
<div class='q2'>It won’t be pruned or hoed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it will grow briers and thorns. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain on it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_7">7&#160;</span>For the vineyard of Yahweh of Armies is the house of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the men of Judah his pleasant plant. </div>
<div class='q2'>He looked for justice, but behold, oppression, </div>
<div class='q2'>for righteousness, but behold, a cry of distress. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_8">8&#160;</span>Woe to those who join house to house, </div>
<div class='q2'>who lay field to field, until there is no room, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you are made to dwell alone in the middle of the land! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_9">9&#160;</span>In my ears, Yahweh of Armies says: “Surely many houses will be desolate, </div>
<div class='q2'>even great and beautiful, unoccupied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_10">10&#160;</span>For ten acres<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of vineyard shall yield one bath,<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>and a homer<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of seed shall yield an ephah.”<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_11">11&#160;</span>Woe to those who rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, </div>
<div class='q2'>who stay late into the night, until wine inflames them! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_12">12&#160;</span>The harp, lyre, tambourine, and flute, with wine, are at their feasts; </div>
<div class='q2'>but they don’t respect the work of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither have they considered the operation of his hands. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore my people go into captivity for lack of knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their honorable men are famished, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their multitudes are parched with thirst. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore Sheol<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> has enlarged its desire, </div>
<div class='q2'>and opened its mouth without measure; </div>
<div class='q2'>and their glory, their multitude, their pomp, and he who rejoices among them, descend into it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_15">15&#160;</span>So man is brought low, </div>
<div class='q2'>mankind is humbled, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the eyes of the arrogant ones are humbled; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_16">16&#160;</span>but Yahweh of Armies is exalted in justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_17">17&#160;</span>Then the lambs will graze as in their pasture, </div>
<div class='q2'>and strangers will eat the ruins of the rich. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_18">18&#160;</span>Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of falsehood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wickedness as with cart rope, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_19">19&#160;</span>who say, “Let him make haste, let him hasten his work, that we may see it; </div>
<div class='q2'>let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near and come, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may know it!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_20">20&#160;</span>Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil; </div>
<div class='q2'>who put darkness for light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and light for darkness; </div>
<div class='q'>who put bitter for sweet, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sweet for bitter! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_21">21&#160;</span>Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prudent in their own sight! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_22">22&#160;</span>Woe to those who are mighty to drink wine, </div>
<div class='q2'>and champions at mixing strong drink; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_23">23&#160;</span>who acquit the guilty for a bribe, </div>
<div class='q2'>but deny justice for the innocent! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore as the tongue of fire devours the stubble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the dry grass sinks down in the flame, </div>
<div class='q2'>so their root shall be as rottenness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their blossom shall go up as dust, </div>
<div class='q'>because they have rejected the law of Yahweh of Armies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh’s anger burns against his people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he has stretched out his hand against them and has struck them. </div>
<div class='q'>The mountains tremble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their dead bodies are as refuse in the middle of the streets. </div>
<div class='q'>For all this, his anger is not turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his hand is still stretched out. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_26">26&#160;</span>He will lift up a banner to the nations from far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will whistle for them from the end of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, they will come speedily and swiftly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_27">27&#160;</span>No one shall be weary nor stumble among them; </div>
<div class='q2'>no one shall slumber nor sleep, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither shall the belt of their waist be untied, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the strap of their sandals be broken, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_28">28&#160;</span>whose arrows are sharp, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all their bows bent. </div>
<div class='q'>Their horses’ hoofs will be like flint, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their wheels like a whirlwind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_29">29&#160;</span>Their roaring will be like a lioness. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will roar like young lions. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, they shall roar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and seize their prey and carry it off, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there will be no one to deliver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS5_30">30&#160;</span>They will roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea. </div>
<div class='q2'>If one looks to the land, behold, darkness and distress. </div>
<div class='q2'>The light is darkened in its clouds.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_1">1&#160;</span>In the year that king Uzziah died, I saw the Lord sitting on a throne, high and lifted up; and his train filled the temple. 
<span class="verse" id="IS6_2">2&#160;</span>Above him stood the seraphim. Each one had six wings. With two he covered his face. With two he covered his feet. With two he flew. 
<span class="verse" id="IS6_3">3&#160;</span>One called to another, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>“Holy, holy, holy, is Yahweh of Armies! </div>
<div class='q2'>The whole earth is full of his glory!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_4">4&#160;</span>The foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of him who called, and the house was filled with smoke. 
<span class="verse" id="IS6_5">5&#160;</span>Then I said, “Woe is me! For I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips and I live among a people of unclean lips, for my eyes have seen the King, Yahweh of Armies!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_6">6&#160;</span>Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="IS6_7">7&#160;</span>He touched my mouth with it, and said, “Behold, this has touched your lips; and your iniquity is taken away, and your sin forgiven.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_8">8&#160;</span>I heard the Lord’s voice, saying, “Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?” </div>
<div class='p'>Then I said, “Here I am. Send me!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_9">9&#160;</span>He said, “Go, and tell this people, </div>
<div class='q'>‘You hear indeed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but don’t understand. </div>
<div class='q'>You see indeed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but don’t perceive.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_10">10&#160;</span>Make the heart of this people fat. </div>
<div class='q2'>Make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes; </div>
<div class='q'>lest they see with their eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>hear with their ears, </div>
<div class='q2'>understand with their heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and turn again, and be healed.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_11">11&#160;</span>Then I said, “Lord, how long?” </div>
<div class='p'>He answered, </div>
<div class='q'>“Until cities are waste without inhabitant, </div>
<div class='q2'>houses without man, </div>
<div class='q2'>the land becomes utterly waste, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_12">12&#160;</span>and Yahweh has removed men far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the forsaken places are many within the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS6_13">13&#160;</span>If there is a tenth left in it, </div>
<div class='q2'>that also will in turn be consumed, </div>
<div class='q'>as a terebinth, and as an oak whose stump remains when they are cut down, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the holy seed is its stump.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_1">1&#160;</span>In the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, Rezin the king of Syria and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_2">2&#160;</span>David’s house was told, “Syria is allied with Ephraim.” His heart trembled, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the forest tremble with the wind. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_3">3&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to Isaiah, “Go out now to meet Ahaz, you, and Shearjashub your son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, on the highway of the fuller’s field. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_4">4&#160;</span>Tell him, ‘Be careful, and keep calm. Don’t be afraid, neither let your heart be faint because of these two tails of smoking torches, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and of the son of Remaliah. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_5">5&#160;</span>Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have plotted evil against you, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_6">6&#160;</span>“Let’s go up against Judah, and tear it apart, and let’s divide it among ourselves, and set up a king within it, even the son of Tabeel.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_7">7&#160;</span>This is what the Lord Yahweh says: “It shall not stand, neither shall it happen.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_8">8&#160;</span>For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin. Within sixty-five years Ephraim shall be broken in pieces, so that it shall not be a people. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_9">9&#160;</span>The head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah’s son. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be established.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke again to Ahaz, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_11">11&#160;</span>“Ask a sign of Yahweh your God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_12">12&#160;</span>But Ahaz said, “I won’t ask. I won’t tempt Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_13">13&#160;</span>He said, “Listen now, house of David. Is it not enough for you to try the patience of men, that you will try the patience of my God also? 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign. Behold, the virgin will conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_15">15&#160;</span>He shall eat butter and honey when he knows to refuse the evil and choose the good. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_16">16&#160;</span>For before the child knows to refuse the evil and choose the good, the land whose two kings you abhor shall be forsaken. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh will bring on you, on your people, and on your father’s house days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah, even the king of Assyria. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_18">18&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that Yahweh will whistle for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_19">19&#160;</span>They shall come, and shall all rest in the desolate valleys, in the clefts of the rocks, on all thorn hedges, and on all pastures. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_20">20&#160;</span>In that day the Lord will shave with a razor that is hired in the parts beyond the River, even with the king of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet; and it shall also consume the beard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_21">21&#160;</span>It shall happen in that day that a man shall keep alive a young cow, and two sheep. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_22">22&#160;</span>It shall happen, that because of the abundance of milk which they shall give he shall eat butter, for everyone will eat butter and honey that is left within the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS7_23">23&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that every place where there were a thousand vines worth a thousand silver shekels,<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> will be for briers and thorns. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_24">24&#160;</span>People will go there with arrows and with bow, because all the land will be briers and thorns. 
<span class="verse" id="IS7_25">25&#160;</span>All the hills that were cultivated with the hoe, you shall not come there for fear of briers and thorns; but it shall be for the sending out of oxen, and for sheep to tread on.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to me, “Take a large tablet, and write on it with a man’s pen, ‘For Maher Shalal Hash Baz’;<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_2">2&#160;</span>and I will take for myself faithful witnesses to testify: Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_3">3&#160;</span>I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bore a son. Then Yahweh said to me, “Call his name ‘Maher Shalal Hash Baz.’ 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_4">4&#160;</span>For before the child knows how to say, ‘My father’ and ‘My mother,’ the riches of Damascus and the plunder of Samaria will be carried away by the king of Assyria.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to me yet again, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_6">6&#160;</span>“Because this people has refused the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah’s son; 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_7">7&#160;</span>now therefore, behold, the Lord brings upon them the mighty flood waters of the River: the king of Assyria and all his glory. It will come up over all its channels, and go over all its banks. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_8">8&#160;</span>It will sweep onward into Judah. It will overflow and pass through. It will reach even to the neck. The stretching out of its wings will fill the width of your land, O Immanuel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_9">9&#160;</span>Make an uproar, you peoples, and be broken in pieces! Listen, all you from far countries: dress for battle, and be shattered! Dress for battle, and be shattered! 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_10">10&#160;</span>Take counsel together, and it will be brought to nothing; speak the word, and it will not stand, for God is with us.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_11">11&#160;</span>For Yahweh spoke this to me with a strong hand, and instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_12">12&#160;</span>“Don’t call a conspiracy all that this people call a conspiracy. Don’t fear their threats or be terrorized. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies is who you must respect as holy. He is the one you must fear. He is the one you must dread. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_14">14&#160;</span>He will be a sanctuary, but for both houses of Israel, he will be a stumbling stone and a rock that makes them fall. For the people of Jerusalem, he will be a trap and a snare. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_15">15&#160;</span>Many will stumble over it, fall, be broken, be snared, and be captured.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_16">16&#160;</span>Wrap up the covenant. Seal the law among my disciples. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_17">17&#160;</span>I will wait for Yahweh, who hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, I and the children whom Yahweh has given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from Yahweh of Armies, who dwells in Mount Zion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS8_19">19&#160;</span>When they tell you, “Consult with those who have familiar spirits and with the wizards, who chirp and who mutter,” shouldn’t a people consult with their God? Should they consult the dead on behalf of the living? 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_20">20&#160;</span>Turn to the law and to the covenant! If they don’t speak according to this word, surely there is no morning for them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_21">21&#160;</span>They will pass through it, very distressed and hungry. It will happen that when they are hungry, they will worry, and curse their king and their God. They will turn their faces upward, 
<span class="verse" id="IS8_22">22&#160;</span>then look to the earth and see distress, darkness, and the gloom of anguish. They will be driven into thick darkness.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_1">1&#160;</span>But there shall be no more gloom for her who was in anguish. In the former time, he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali; but in the latter time he has made it glorious, by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the nations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_2">2&#160;</span>The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light. </div>
<div class='q2'>The light has shined on those who lived in the land of the shadow of death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_3">3&#160;</span>You have multiplied the nation. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have increased their joy. </div>
<div class='p'>They rejoice before you according to the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the plunder. 
<span class="verse" id="IS9_4">4&#160;</span>For the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, you have broken as in the day of Midian. 
<span class="verse" id="IS9_5">5&#160;</span>For all the armor of the armed man in the noisy battle, and the garments rolled in blood, will be for burning, fuel for the fire. 
<span class="verse" id="IS9_6">6&#160;</span>For a child is born to us. A son is given to us; and the government will be on his shoulders. His name will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. 
<span class="verse" id="IS9_7">7&#160;</span>Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end, on David’s throne, and on his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from that time on, even forever. The zeal of Yahweh of Armies will perform this. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_8">8&#160;</span>The Lord sent a word into Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it falls on Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_9">9&#160;</span>All the people will know, </div>
<div class='q2'>including Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria, who say in pride and in arrogance of heart, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_10">10&#160;</span>“The bricks have fallen, </div>
<div class='q2'>but we will build with cut stone. </div>
<div class='q'>The sycamore fig trees have been cut down, </div>
<div class='q2'>but we will put cedars in their place.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh will set up on high against him the adversaries of Rezin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will stir up his enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_12">12&#160;</span>The Syrians in front, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Philistines behind; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will devour Israel with open mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>For all this, his anger is not turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his hand is stretched out still. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_13">13&#160;</span>Yet the people have not turned to him who struck them, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither have they sought Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh will cut off from Israel head and tail, </div>
<div class='q2'>palm branch and reed, in one day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_15">15&#160;</span>The elder and the honorable man is the head, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the prophet who teaches lies is the tail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_16">16&#160;</span>For those who lead this people lead them astray; </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who are led by them are destroyed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_17">17&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord will not rejoice over their young men, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will he have compassion on their fatherless and widows; </div>
<div class='q'>for everyone is profane and an evildoer, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every mouth speaks folly. </div>
<div class='q'>For all this his anger is not turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his hand is stretched out still. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_18">18&#160;</span>For wickedness burns like a fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>It devours the briers and thorns; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, it kindles in the thickets of the forest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they roll upward in a column of smoke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_19">19&#160;</span>Through Yahweh of Armies’ wrath, the land is burned up; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the people are the fuel for the fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one spares his brother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_20">20&#160;</span>One will devour on the right hand, and be hungry; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will eat on the left hand, and they will not be satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>Everyone will eat the flesh of his own arm: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS9_21">21&#160;</span>Manasseh eating Ephraim and Ephraim eating Manasseh, and they together will be against Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>For all this his anger is not turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his hand is stretched out still.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_1">1&#160;</span>Woe to those who decree unrighteous decrees, and to the writers who write oppressive decrees 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_2">2&#160;</span>to deprive the needy of justice, and to rob the poor among my people of their rights, that widows may be their plunder, and that they may make the fatherless their prey! 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_3">3&#160;</span>What will you do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which will come from afar? To whom will you flee for help? Where will you leave your wealth? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_4">4&#160;</span>They will only bow down under the prisoners, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will fall under the slain. </div>
<div class='q'>For all this his anger is not turned away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his hand is stretched out still. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_5">5&#160;</span>Alas Assyrian, the rod of my anger, the staff in whose hand is my indignation! 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_6">6&#160;</span>I will send him against a profane nation, and against the people who anger me I will give him a command to take the plunder and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_7">7&#160;</span>However, he doesn’t mean so, neither does his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off not a few nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_8">8&#160;</span>For he says, “Aren’t all of my princes kings? 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_9">9&#160;</span>Isn’t Calno like Carchemish? Isn’t Hamath like Arpad? Isn’t Samaria like Damascus?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_10">10&#160;</span>As my hand has found the kingdoms of the idols, whose engraved images exceeded those of Jerusalem and of Samaria, 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_11">11&#160;</span>shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore it will happen that when the Lord has performed his whole work on Mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the willful proud heart of the king of Assyria, and the insolence of his arrogant looks. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_13">13&#160;</span>For he has said, “By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I have understanding. I have removed the boundaries of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures. Like a valiant man I have brought down their rulers. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_14">14&#160;</span>My hand has found the riches of the peoples like a nest, and like one gathers eggs that are abandoned, I have gathered all the earth. There was no one who moved their wing, or that opened their mouth, or chirped.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_15">15&#160;</span>Should an ax brag against him who chops with it? Should a saw exalt itself above him who saws with it? As if a rod should lift those who lift it up, or as if a staff should lift up someone who is not wood. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, will send among his fat ones leanness; and under his glory a burning will be kindled like the burning of fire. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_17">17&#160;</span>The light of Israel will be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame; and it will burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_18">18&#160;</span>He will consume the glory of his forest and of his fruitful field, both soul and body. It will be as when a standard bearer faints. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_19">19&#160;</span>The remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few, so that a child could write their number. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_20">20&#160;</span>It will come to pass in that day that the remnant of Israel, and those who have escaped from the house of Jacob will no more again lean on him who struck them, but shall lean on Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel, in truth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_21">21&#160;</span>A remnant will return, even the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_22">22&#160;</span>For though your people, Israel, are like the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them will return. A destruction is determined, overflowing with righteousness. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_23">23&#160;</span>For the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, will make a full end, and that determined, throughout all the earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, says, “My people who dwell in Zion, don’t be afraid of the Assyrian, though he strike you with the rod, and lift up his staff against you, as Egypt did. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_25">25&#160;</span>For yet a very little while, and the indignation against you will be accomplished, and my anger will be directed to his destruction.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_26">26&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies will stir up a scourge against him, as in the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb. His rod will be over the sea, and he will lift it up like he did against Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_27">27&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that his burden will depart from off your shoulder, and his yoke from off your neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing oil. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_28">28&#160;</span>He has come to Aiath. He has passed through Migron. At Michmash he stores his baggage. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_29">29&#160;</span>They have gone over the pass. They have taken up their lodging at Geba. Ramah trembles. Gibeah of Saul has fled. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_30">30&#160;</span>Cry aloud with your voice, daughter of Gallim! Listen, Laishah! You poor Anathoth! 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_31">31&#160;</span>Madmenah is a fugitive. The inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_32">32&#160;</span>This very day he will halt at Nob. He shakes his hand at the mountain of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS10_33">33&#160;</span>Behold, the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, will lop the boughs with terror. The tall will be cut down, and the lofty will be brought low. 
<span class="verse" id="IS10_34">34&#160;</span>He will cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon will fall by the Mighty One.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_1">1&#160;</span>A shoot will come out of the stock of Jesse, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a branch out of his roots will bear fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh’s Spirit will rest on him: </div>
<div class='q2'>the spirit of wisdom and understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>the spirit of counsel and might, </div>
<div class='q2'>the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_3">3&#160;</span>His delight will be in the fear of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>He will not judge by the sight of his eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither decide by the hearing of his ears; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_4">4&#160;</span>but he will judge the poor with righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and decide with equity for the humble of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth; </div>
<div class='q2'>and with the breath of his lips he will kill the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_5">5&#160;</span>Righteousness will be the belt around his waist, </div>
<div class='q2'>and faithfulness the belt around his waist. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_6">6&#160;</span>The wolf will live with the lamb, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the leopard will lie down with the young goat, </div>
<div class='q2'>the calf, the young lion, and the fattened calf together; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a little child will lead them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_7">7&#160;</span>The cow and the bear will graze. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their young ones will lie down together. </div>
<div class='q2'>The lion will eat straw like the ox. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_8">8&#160;</span>The nursing child will play near a cobra’s hole, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the weaned child will put his hand on the viper’s den. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_9">9&#160;</span>They will not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the earth will be full of the knowledge of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the waters cover the sea. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_10">10&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that the nations will seek the root of Jesse, who stands as a banner of the peoples; and his resting place will be glorious. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS11_11">11&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that the Lord will set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant that is left of his people from Assyria, from Egypt, from Pathros, from Cush, from Elam, from Shinar, from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="IS11_12">12&#160;</span>He will set up a banner for the nations, and will assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS11_13">13&#160;</span>The envy also of Ephraim will depart, and those who persecute Judah will be cut off. Ephraim won’t envy Judah, and Judah won’t persecute Ephraim. 
<span class="verse" id="IS11_14">14&#160;</span>They will fly down on the shoulders of the Philistines on the west. Together they will plunder the children of the east. They will extend their power over Edom and Moab, and the children of Ammon will obey them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS11_15">15&#160;</span>Yahweh will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea; and with his scorching wind he will wave his hand over the River, and will split it into seven streams, and cause men to march over in sandals. 
<span class="verse" id="IS11_16">16&#160;</span>There will be a highway for the remnant that is left of his people from Assyria, like there was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS12_1">1&#160;</span>In that day you will say, “I will give thanks to you, Yahweh; for though you were angry with me, your anger has turned away and you comfort me. 
<span class="verse" id="IS12_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, God is my salvation. I will trust, and will not be afraid; for Yah, Yahweh, is my strength and song; and he has become my salvation.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS12_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore with joy you will draw water out of the wells of salvation. 
<span class="verse" id="IS12_4">4&#160;</span>In that day you will say, “Give thanks to Yahweh! Call on his name! Declare his doings among the peoples! Proclaim that his name is exalted! 
<span class="verse" id="IS12_5">5&#160;</span>Sing to Yahweh, for he has done excellent things! Let this be known in all the earth! 
<span class="verse" id="IS12_6">6&#160;</span>Cry aloud and shout, you inhabitant of Zion, for the Holy One of Israel is great among you!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_2">2&#160;</span>Set up a banner on the bare mountain! Lift up your voice to them! Wave your hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_3">3&#160;</span>I have commanded my consecrated ones; yes, I have called my mighty men for my anger, even my proudly exulting ones. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_4">4&#160;</span>The noise of a multitude is in the mountains, as of a great people; the noise of an uproar of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together! Yahweh of Armies is mustering the army for the battle. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_5">5&#160;</span>They come from a far country, from the uttermost part of heaven, even Yahweh, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_6">6&#160;</span>Wail, for Yahweh’s day is at hand! It will come as destruction from the Almighty. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore all hands will be feeble, and everyone’s heart will melt. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_8">8&#160;</span>They will be dismayed. Pangs and sorrows will seize them. They will be in pain like a woman in labor. They will look in amazement one at another. Their faces will be faces of flame. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, the day of Yahweh comes, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger; to make the land a desolation, and to destroy its sinners out of it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_10">10&#160;</span>For the stars of the sky and its constellations will not give their light. The sun will be darkened in its going out, and the moon will not cause its light to shine. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_11">11&#160;</span>I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity. I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will humble the arrogance of the terrible. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_12">12&#160;</span>I will make people more rare than fine gold, even a person than the pure gold of Ophir. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore I will make the heavens tremble, and the earth will be shaken out of its place in Yahweh of Armies’ wrath, and in the day of his fierce anger. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_14">14&#160;</span>It will happen that like a hunted gazelle and like sheep that no one gathers, they will each turn to their own people, and will each flee to their own land. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_15">15&#160;</span>Everyone who is found will be thrust through. Everyone who is captured will fall by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_16">16&#160;</span>Their infants also will be dashed in pieces before their eyes. Their houses will be ransacked, and their wives raped. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS13_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, who will not value silver, and as for gold, they will not delight in it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_18">18&#160;</span>Their bows will dash the young men in pieces; and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb. Their eyes will not spare children. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_19">19&#160;</span>Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans’ pride, will be like when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_20">20&#160;</span>It will never be inhabited, neither will it be lived in from generation to generation. The Arabian will not pitch a tent there, neither will shepherds make their flocks lie down there. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_21">21&#160;</span>But wild animals of the desert will lie there, and their houses will be full of jackals. Ostriches will dwell there, and wild goats will frolic there. 
<span class="verse" id="IS13_22">22&#160;</span>Hyenas will cry in their fortresses, and jackals in the pleasant palaces. Her time is near to come, and her days will not be prolonged.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_1">1&#160;</span>For Yahweh will have compassion on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land. The foreigner will join himself with them, and they will unite with the house of Jacob. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_2">2&#160;</span>The peoples will take them, and bring them to their place. The house of Israel will possess them in Yahweh’s land for servants and for handmaids. They will take as captives those whose captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_3">3&#160;</span>It will happen in the day that Yahweh will give you rest from your sorrow, from your trouble, and from the hard service in which you were made to serve, 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_4">4&#160;</span>that you will take up this parable against the king of Babylon, and say, “How the oppressor has ceased! The golden city has ceased!” 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh has broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of the rulers, 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_6">6&#160;</span>who struck the peoples in wrath with a continual stroke, who ruled the nations in anger, with a persecution that no one restrained. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_7">7&#160;</span>The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet. They break out in song. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_8">8&#160;</span>Yes, the cypress trees rejoice with you, with the cedars of Lebanon, saying, “Since you are humbled, no lumberjack has come up against us.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_9">9&#160;</span>Sheol<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> from beneath has moved for you to meet you at your coming. It stirs up the departed spirits for you, even all the rulers of the earth. It has raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_10">10&#160;</span>They all will answer and ask you, “Have you also become as weak as we are? Have you become like us?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_11">11&#160;</span>Your pomp is brought down to Sheol,<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> with the sound of your stringed instruments. Maggots are spread out under you, and worms cover you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_12">12&#160;</span>How you have fallen from heaven, shining one, son of the dawn! How you are cut down to the ground, who laid the nations low! 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_13">13&#160;</span>You said in your heart, “I will ascend into heaven! I will exalt my throne above the stars of God! I will sit on the mountain of assembly, in the far north! 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_14">14&#160;</span>I will ascend above the heights of the clouds! I will make myself like the Most High!” 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_15">15&#160;</span>Yet you shall be brought down to Sheol,<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> to the depths of the pit. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_16">16&#160;</span>Those who see you will stare at you. They will ponder you, saying, “Is this the man who made the earth to tremble, who shook kingdoms, 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_17">17&#160;</span>who made the world like a wilderness, and overthrew its cities, who didn’t release his prisoners to their home?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_18">18&#160;</span>All the kings of the nations sleep in glory, everyone in his own house. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_19">19&#160;</span>But you are cast away from your tomb like an abominable branch, clothed with the slain who are thrust through with the sword, who go down to the stones of the pit; like a dead body trodden under foot. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_20">20&#160;</span>You will not join them in burial, because you have destroyed your land. You have killed your people. The offspring of evildoers will not be named forever. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_21">21&#160;</span>Prepare for slaughter of his children because of the iniquity of their fathers, that they not rise up and possess the earth, and fill the surface of the world with cities. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_22">22&#160;</span>“I will rise up against them,” says Yahweh of Armies, “and cut off from Babylon name and remnant, and son and son’s son,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_23">23&#160;</span>“I will also make it a possession for the porcupine, and pools of water. I will sweep it with the broom of destruction,” says Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies has sworn, saying, “Surely, as I have thought, so shall it happen; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand: 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_25">25&#160;</span>that I will break the Assyrian in my land, and tread him under foot on my mountains. Then his yoke will leave them, and his burden leave their shoulders. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_26">26&#160;</span>This is the plan that is determined for the whole earth. This is the hand that is stretched out over all the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_27">27&#160;</span>For Yahweh of Armies has planned, and who can stop it? His hand is stretched out, and who can turn it back?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_28">28&#160;</span>This burden was in the year that king Ahaz died. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t rejoice, O Philistia, all of you, because the rod that struck you is broken; for out of the serpent’s root an adder will emerge, and his fruit will be a fiery flying serpent. 
<span class="verse" id="IS14_30">30&#160;</span>The firstborn of the poor will eat, and the needy will lie down in safety; and I will kill your root with famine, and your remnant will be killed. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_31">31&#160;</span>Howl, gate! Cry, city! You are melted away, Philistia, all of you; for smoke comes out of the north, and there is no straggler in his ranks. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS14_32">32&#160;</span>What will they answer the messengers of the nation? That Yahweh has founded Zion, and in her the afflicted of his people will take refuge.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS15_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of Moab. </div>
<div class='p'>For in a night, Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to nothing. For in a night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_2">2&#160;</span>They have gone up to Bayith, and to Dibon, to the high places, to weep. Moab wails over Nebo and over Medeba. Baldness is on all of their heads. Every beard is cut off. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_3">3&#160;</span>In their streets, they clothe themselves in sackcloth. In their streets and on their housetops, everyone wails, weeping abundantly. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_4">4&#160;</span>Heshbon cries out with Elealeh. Their voice is heard even to Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud. Their souls tremble within them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_5">5&#160;</span>My heart cries out for Moab! Her nobles flee to Zoar, to Eglath Shelishiyah; for they go up by the ascent of Luhith with weeping; for on the way to Horonaim, they raise up a cry of destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_6">6&#160;</span>For the waters of Nimrim will be desolate; for the grass has withered away, the tender grass fails, there is no green thing. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore they will carry away the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have stored up, over the brook of the willows. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_8">8&#160;</span>For the cry has gone around the borders of Moab, its wailing to Eglaim, and its wailing to Beer Elim. 
<span class="verse" id="IS15_9">9&#160;</span>For the waters of Dimon are full of blood; for I will bring yet more on Dimon, a lion on those of Moab who escape, and on the remnant of the land.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_1">1&#160;</span>Send the lambs for the ruler of the land from Selah to the wilderness, to the mountain of the daughter of Zion. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_2">2&#160;</span>For it will be that as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so will the daughters of Moab be at the fords of the Arnon. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_3">3&#160;</span>Give counsel! Execute justice! Make your shade like the night in the middle of the noonday! Hide the outcasts! Don’t betray the fugitive! 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_4">4&#160;</span>Let my outcasts dwell with you! As for Moab, be a hiding place for him from the face of the destroyer. For the extortionist is brought to nothing. Destruction ceases. The oppressors are consumed out of the land. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_5">5&#160;</span>A throne will be established in loving kindness. One will sit on it in truth, in the tent of David, judging, seeking justice, and swift to do righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_6">6&#160;</span>We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very proud; even of his arrogance, his pride, and his wrath. His boastings are nothing. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_7">7&#160;</span>Therefore Moab will wail for Moab. Everyone will wail. You will mourn for the raisin cakes of Kir Hareseth, utterly stricken. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_8">8&#160;</span>For the fields of Heshbon languish with the vine of Sibmah. The lords of the nations have broken down its choice branches, which reached even to Jazer, which wandered into the wilderness. Its shoots were spread abroad. They passed over the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer for the vine of Sibmah. I will water you with my tears, Heshbon, and Elealeh: for on your summer fruits and on your harvest the battle shout has fallen. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_10">10&#160;</span>Gladness is taken away, and joy out of the fruitful field; and in the vineyards there will be no singing, neither joyful noise. Nobody will tread out wine in the presses. I have made the shouting stop. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore my heart sounds like a harp for Moab, and my inward parts for Kir Heres. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_12">12&#160;</span>It will happen that when Moab presents himself, when he wearies himself on the high place, and comes to his sanctuary to pray, that he will not prevail. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS16_13">13&#160;</span>This is the word that Yahweh spoke concerning Moab in time past. 
<span class="verse" id="IS16_14">14&#160;</span>But now Yahweh has spoken, saying, “Within three years, as a worker bound by contract would count them, the glory of Moab shall be brought into contempt, with all his great multitude; and the remnant will be very small and feeble.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of Damascus. </div>
<div class='p'>“Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it will be a ruinous heap. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_2">2&#160;</span>The cities of Aroer are forsaken. They will be for flocks, which shall lie down, and no one shall make them afraid. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_3">3&#160;</span>The fortress shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus, and the remnant of Syria. They will be as the glory of the children of Israel,” says Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_4">4&#160;</span>“It will happen in that day that the glory of Jacob will be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh will become lean. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_5">5&#160;</span>It will be like when the harvester gathers the wheat, and his arm reaps the grain. Yes, it will be like when one gleans grain in the valley of Rephaim. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_6">6&#160;</span>Yet gleanings will be left there, like the shaking of an olive tree, two or three olives in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outermost branches of a fruitful tree,” says Yahweh, the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_7">7&#160;</span>In that day, people will look to their Maker, and their eyes will have respect for the Holy One of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_8">8&#160;</span>They will not look to the altars, the work of their hands; neither shall they respect that which their fingers have made, either the Asherah poles or the incense altars. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_9">9&#160;</span>In that day, their strong cities will be like the forsaken places in the woods and on the mountain top, which were forsaken from before the children of Israel; and it will be a desolation. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_10">10&#160;</span>For you have forgotten the God of your salvation, and have not remembered the rock of your strength. Therefore you plant pleasant plants, and set out foreign seedlings. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_11">11&#160;</span>In the day of your planting, you hedge it in. In the morning, you make your seed blossom, but the harvest flees away in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS17_12">12&#160;</span>Ah, the uproar of many peoples who roar like the roaring of the seas; and the rushing of nations that rush like the rushing of mighty waters! 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_13">13&#160;</span>The nations will rush like the rushing of many waters, but he will rebuke them, and they will flee far off, and will be chased like the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like the whirling dust before the storm. 
<span class="verse" id="IS17_14">14&#160;</span>At evening, behold, terror! Before the morning, they are no more. This is the portion of those who plunder us, and the lot of those who rob us.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS18_1">1&#160;</span>Ah, the land of the rustling of wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia; 
<span class="verse" id="IS18_2">2&#160;</span>that sends ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of papyrus on the waters, saying, “Go, you swift messengers, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people awesome from their beginning onward, a nation that measures out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide!” 
<span class="verse" id="IS18_3">3&#160;</span>All you inhabitants of the world, and you dwellers on the earth, when a banner is lifted up on the mountains, look! When the trumpet is blown, listen! </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS18_4">4&#160;</span>For Yahweh said to me, “I will be still, and I will see in my dwelling place, like clear heat in sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS18_5">5&#160;</span>For before the harvest, when the blossom is over, and the flower becomes a ripening grape, he will cut off the sprigs with pruning hooks, and he will cut down and take away the spreading branches. 
<span class="verse" id="IS18_6">6&#160;</span>They will be left together for the ravenous birds of the mountains, and for the animals of the earth. The ravenous birds will eat them in the summer, and all the animals of the earth will eat them in the winter. 
<span class="verse" id="IS18_7">7&#160;</span>In that time, a present will be brought to Yahweh of Armies from a people tall and smooth, even from a people awesome from their beginning onward, a nation that measures out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide, to the place of the name of Yahweh of Armies, Mount Zion.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>“Behold, Yahweh rides on a swift cloud, and comes to Egypt. The idols of Egypt will tremble at his presence; and the heart of Egypt will melt within it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_2">2&#160;</span>I will stir up the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they will fight everyone against his brother, and everyone against his neighbor; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_3">3&#160;</span>The spirit of the Egyptians will fail within them. I will destroy their counsel. They will seek the idols, the charmers, those who have familiar spirits, and the wizards. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_4">4&#160;</span>I will give over the Egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord. A fierce king will rule over them,” says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_5">5&#160;</span>The waters will fail from the sea, and the river will be wasted and become dry. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_6">6&#160;</span>The rivers will become foul. The streams of Egypt will be diminished and dried up. The reeds and flags will wither away. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_7">7&#160;</span>The meadows by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and all the sown fields of the Nile, will become dry, be driven away, and be no more. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_8">8&#160;</span>The fishermen will lament, and all those who fish in the Nile will mourn, and those who spread nets on the waters will languish. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_9">9&#160;</span>Moreover those who work in combed flax, and those who weave white cloth, will be confounded. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_10">10&#160;</span>The pillars will be broken in pieces. All those who work for hire will be grieved in soul. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_11">11&#160;</span>The princes of Zoan are utterly foolish. The counsel of the wisest counselors of Pharaoh has become stupid. How do you say to Pharaoh, “I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_12">12&#160;</span>Where then are your wise men? Let them tell you now; and let them know what Yahweh of Armies has purposed concerning Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_13">13&#160;</span>The princes of Zoan have become fools. The princes of Memphis are deceived. They have caused Egypt to go astray, those who are the cornerstone of her tribes. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh has mixed a spirit of perverseness in the middle of her; and they have caused Egypt to go astray in all of its works, like a drunken man staggers in his vomit. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_15">15&#160;</span>Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which head or tail, palm branch or rush, may do. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_16">16&#160;</span>In that day the Egyptians will be like women. They will tremble and fear because of the shaking of Yahweh of Armies’s hand, which he shakes over them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_17">17&#160;</span>The land of Judah will become a terror to Egypt. Everyone to whom mention is made of it will be afraid, because of the plans of Yahweh of Armies, which he determines against it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_18">18&#160;</span>In that day, there will be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak the language of Canaan, and swear to Yahweh of Armies. One will be called “The city of destruction.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_19">19&#160;</span>In that day, there will be an altar to Yahweh in the middle of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to Yahweh at its border. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_20">20&#160;</span>It will be for a sign and for a witness to Yahweh of Armies in the land of Egypt; for they will cry to Yahweh because of oppressors, and he will send them a savior and a defender, and he will deliver them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_21">21&#160;</span>Yahweh will be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians will know Yahweh in that day. Yes, they will worship with sacrifice and offering, and will vow a vow to Yahweh, and will perform it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh will strike Egypt, striking and healing. They will return to Yahweh, and he will be entreated by them, and will heal them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_23">23&#160;</span>In that day there will be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria, and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria; and the Egyptians will worship with the Assyrians. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS19_24">24&#160;</span>In that day, Israel will be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing within the earth; 
<span class="verse" id="IS19_25">25&#160;</span>because Yahweh of Armies has blessed them, saying, “Blessed be Egypt my people, Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS20_1">1&#160;</span>In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him, and he fought against Ashdod and took it; 
<span class="verse" id="IS20_2">2&#160;</span>at that time Yahweh spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, “Go, and loosen the sackcloth from off your waist, and take your sandals from off your feet.” He did so, walking naked and barefoot. 
<span class="verse" id="IS20_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh said, “As my servant Isaiah has walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and a wonder concerning Egypt and concerning Ethiopia, 
<span class="verse" id="IS20_4">4&#160;</span>so the king of Assyria will lead away the captives of Egypt and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. 
<span class="verse" id="IS20_5">5&#160;</span>They will be dismayed and confounded, because of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their glory. 
<span class="verse" id="IS20_6">6&#160;</span>The inhabitants of this coast land will say in that day, ‘Behold, this is our expectation, where we fled for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria. And we, how will we escape?’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of the wilderness of the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>As whirlwinds in the South sweep through, it comes from the wilderness, from an awesome land. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_2">2&#160;</span>A grievous vision is declared to me. The treacherous man deals treacherously, and the destroyer destroys. Go up, Elam; attack! I have stopped all of Media’s sighing. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore my thighs are filled with anguish. Pains have seized me, like the pains of a woman in labor. I am in so much pain that I can’t hear. I am so dismayed that I can’t see. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_4">4&#160;</span>My heart flutters. Horror has frightened me. The twilight that I desired has been turned into trembling for me. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_5">5&#160;</span>They prepare the table. They set the watch. They eat. They drink. Rise up, you princes, oil the shield! 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_6">6&#160;</span>For the Lord said to me, “Go, set a watchman. Let him declare what he sees. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_7">7&#160;</span>When he sees a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of donkeys, a troop of camels, he shall listen diligently with great attentiveness.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_8">8&#160;</span>He cried like a lion: “Lord, I stand continually on the watchtower in the daytime, and every night I stay at my post. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, here comes a troop of men, horsemen in pairs.” He answered, “Fallen, fallen is Babylon; and all the engraved images of her gods are broken to the ground. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_10">10&#160;</span>You are my threshing, and the grain of my floor!” That which I have heard from Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, I have declared to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_11">11&#160;</span>The burden of Dumah. </div>
<div class='p'>One calls to me out of Seir, “Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_12">12&#160;</span>The watchman said, “The morning comes, and also the night. If you will inquire, inquire. Come back again.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS21_13">13&#160;</span>The burden on Arabia. </div>
<div class='p'>You will lodge in the thickets in Arabia, you caravans of Dedanites. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_14">14&#160;</span>They brought water to him who was thirsty. The inhabitants of the land of Tema met the fugitives with their bread. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_15">15&#160;</span>For they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword, from the bent bow, and from the heat of battle. 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_16">16&#160;</span>For the Lord said to me, “Within a year, as a worker bound by contract would count it, all the glory of Kedar will fail, 
<span class="verse" id="IS21_17">17&#160;</span>and the residue of the number of the archers, the mighty men of the children of Kedar, will be few; for Yahweh, the God of Israel, has spoken it.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of the valley of vision. </div>
<div class='p'>What ails you now, that you have all gone up to the housetops? 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_2">2&#160;</span>You that are full of shouting, a tumultuous city, a joyous town, your slain are not slain with the sword, neither are they dead in battle. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_3">3&#160;</span>All your rulers fled away together. They were bound by the archers. All who were found by you were bound together. They fled far away. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_4">4&#160;</span>Therefore I said, “Look away from me. I will weep bitterly. Don’t labor to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter of my people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_5">5&#160;</span>For it is a day of confusion, and of treading down, and of perplexity from the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, in the valley of vision, a breaking down of the walls, and a crying to the mountains.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_6">6&#160;</span>Elam carried his quiver, with chariots of men and horsemen; and Kir uncovered the shield. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_7">7&#160;</span>Your choicest valleys were full of chariots, and the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_8">8&#160;</span>He took away the covering of Judah; and you looked in that day to the armor in the house of the forest. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_9">9&#160;</span>You saw the breaches of David’s city, that they were many; and you gathered together the waters of the lower pool. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_10">10&#160;</span>You counted the houses of Jerusalem, and you broke down the houses to fortify the wall. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_11">11&#160;</span>You also made a reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old pool. But you didn’t look to him who had done this, neither did you have respect for him who planned it long ago. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_12">12&#160;</span>In that day, the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, called to weeping, to mourning, to baldness, and to dressing in sackcloth; 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_13">13&#160;</span>and behold, there is joy and gladness, killing cattle and killing sheep, eating meat and drinking wine: “Let’s eat and drink, for tomorrow we will die.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies revealed himself in my ears, “Surely this iniquity will not be forgiven you until you die,” says the Lord, Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_15">15&#160;</span>The Lord, Yahweh of Armies says, “Go, get yourself to this treasurer, even to Shebna, who is over the house, and say, 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_16">16&#160;</span>‘What are you doing here? Who has you here, that you have dug out a tomb here?’ Cutting himself out a tomb on high, chiseling a habitation for himself in the rock!” 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh will overcome you and hurl you away violently. Yes, he will grasp you firmly. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_18">18&#160;</span>He will surely wind you around and around, and throw you like a ball into a large country. There you will die, and there the chariots of your glory will be, you disgrace of your lord’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_19">19&#160;</span>I will thrust you from your office. You will be pulled down from your station. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS22_20">20&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_21">21&#160;</span>and I will clothe him with your robe, and strengthen him with your belt. I will commit your government into his hand; and he will be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_22">22&#160;</span>I will lay the key of David’s house on his shoulder. He will open, and no one will shut. He will shut, and no one will open. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_23">23&#160;</span>I will fasten him like a nail in a sure place. He will be for a throne of glory to his father’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_24">24&#160;</span>They will hang on him all the glory of his father’s house, the offspring and the issue, every small vessel, from the cups even to all the pitchers. 
<span class="verse" id="IS22_25">25&#160;</span>“In that day,” says Yahweh of Armies, “the nail that was fastened in a sure place will give way. It will be cut down and fall. The burden that was on it will be cut off, for Yahweh has spoken it.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_1">1&#160;</span>The burden of Tyre. </div>
<div class='p'>Howl, you ships of Tarshish! For it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in. From the land of Kittim it is revealed to them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_2">2&#160;</span>Be still, you inhabitants of the coast, you whom the merchants of Sidon that pass over the sea have replenished. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_3">3&#160;</span>On great waters, the seed of the Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue. She was the market of nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_4">4&#160;</span>Be ashamed, Sidon; for the sea has spoken, the stronghold of the sea, saying, “I have not travailed, nor given birth, neither have I nourished young men, nor brought up virgins.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_5">5&#160;</span>When the report comes to Egypt, they will be in anguish at the report of Tyre. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_6">6&#160;</span>Pass over to Tarshish! Wail, you inhabitants of the coast! 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_7">7&#160;</span>Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days, whose feet carried her far away to travel? </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_8">8&#160;</span>Who has planned this against Tyre, the giver of crowns, whose merchants are princes, whose traders are the honorable of the earth? 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh of Armies has planned it, to stain the pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_10">10&#160;</span>Pass through your land like the Nile, daughter of Tarshish. There is no restraint any more. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_11">11&#160;</span>He has stretched out his hand over the sea. He has shaken the kingdoms. Yahweh has ordered the destruction of Canaan’s strongholds. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_12">12&#160;</span>He said, “You shall rejoice no more, you oppressed virgin daughter of Sidon. Arise, pass over to Kittim. Even there you will have no rest.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS23_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, the land of the Chaldeans. This people didn’t exist. The Assyrians founded it for those who dwell in the wilderness. They set up their towers. They overthrew its palaces. They made it a ruin. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_14">14&#160;</span>Howl, you ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold is laid waste! 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_15">15&#160;</span>It will come to pass in that day that Tyre will be forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king. After the end of seventy years it will be to Tyre like in the song of the prostitute. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_16">16&#160;</span>Take a harp; go about the city, you prostitute that has been forgotten. Make sweet melody. Sing many songs, that you may be remembered. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_17">17&#160;</span>It will happen after the end of seventy years that Yahweh will visit Tyre. She will return to her wages, and will play the prostitute with all the kingdoms of the world on the surface of the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS23_18">18&#160;</span>Her merchandise and her wages will be holiness to Yahweh. It will not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise will be for those who dwell before Yahweh, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_1">1&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh makes the earth empty, makes it waste, turns it upside down, and scatters its inhabitants. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_2">2&#160;</span>It will be as with the people, so with the priest; as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the creditor, so with the debtor; as with the taker of interest, so with the giver of interest. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_3">3&#160;</span>The earth will be utterly emptied and utterly laid waste; for Yahweh has spoken this word. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_4">4&#160;</span>The earth mourns and fades away. The world languishes and fades away. The lofty people of the earth languish. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_5">5&#160;</span>The earth also is polluted under its inhabitants, because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, and broken the everlasting covenant. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore the curse has devoured the earth, and those who dwell therein are found guilty. Therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men are left. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_7">7&#160;</span>The new wine mourns. The vine languishes. All the merry-hearted sigh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_8">8&#160;</span>The mirth of tambourines ceases. The sound of those who rejoice ends. The joy of the harp ceases. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_9">9&#160;</span>They will not drink wine with a song. Strong drink will be bitter to those who drink it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_10">10&#160;</span>The confused city is broken down. Every house is shut up, that no man may come in. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_11">11&#160;</span>There is a crying in the streets because of the wine. All joy is darkened. The mirth of the land is gone. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_12">12&#160;</span>The city is left in desolation, and the gate is struck with destruction. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_13">13&#160;</span>For it will be so within the earth among the peoples, as the shaking of an olive tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is done. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_14">14&#160;</span>These shall lift up their voice. They will shout for the majesty of Yahweh. They cry aloud from the sea. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore glorify Yahweh in the east, even the name of Yahweh, the God of Israel, in the islands of the sea! 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_16">16&#160;</span>From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs. Glory to the righteous! </div>
<div class='p'>But I said, “I pine away! I pine away! woe is me!” The treacherous have dealt treacherously. Yes, the treacherous have dealt very treacherously. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_17">17&#160;</span>Fear, the pit, and the snare are on you who inhabit the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_18">18&#160;</span>It will happen that he who flees from the noise of the fear will fall into the pit; and he who comes up out of the middle of the pit will be taken in the snare; for the windows on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth tremble. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_19">19&#160;</span>The earth is utterly broken. The earth is torn apart. The earth is shaken violently. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_20">20&#160;</span>The earth will stagger like a drunken man, and will sway back and forth like a hammock. Its disobedience will be heavy on it, and it will fall and not rise again. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS24_21">21&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that Yahweh will punish the army of the high ones on high, and the kings of the earth on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_22">22&#160;</span>They will be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and will be shut up in the prison; and after many days they will be visited. 
<span class="verse" id="IS24_23">23&#160;</span>Then the moon will be confounded, and the sun ashamed; for Yahweh of Armies will reign on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem; and glory will be before his elders.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh, you are my God. I will exalt you! I will praise your name, for you have done wonderful things, things planned long ago, in complete faithfulness and truth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_2">2&#160;</span>For you have made a city into a heap, a fortified city into a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city. It will never be built. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore a strong people will glorify you. A city of awesome nations will fear you. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_4">4&#160;</span>For you have been a stronghold to the poor, a stronghold to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade from the heat, when the blast of the dreaded ones is like a storm against the wall. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_5">5&#160;</span>As the heat in a dry place you will bring down the noise of strangers; as the heat by the shade of a cloud, the song of the dreaded ones will be brought low. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_6">6&#160;</span>In this mountain, Yahweh of Armies will make all peoples a feast of choice meat,<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> a feast of choice wines, of choice meat full of marrow, of well refined choice wines. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_7">7&#160;</span>He will destroy in this mountain the surface of the covering that covers all peoples, and the veil that is spread over all nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_8">8&#160;</span>He has swallowed up death forever! The Lord Yahweh will wipe away tears from off all faces. He will take the reproach of his people away from off all the earth, for Yahweh has spoken it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS25_9">9&#160;</span>It shall be said in that day, “Behold, this is our God! We have waited for him, and he will save us! This is Yahweh! We have waited for him. We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation!” 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_10">10&#160;</span>For Yahweh’s hand will rest in this mountain. </div>
<div class='p'>Moab will be trodden down in his place, even like straw is trodden down in the water of the dunghill. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_11">11&#160;</span>He will spread out his hands in the middle of it, like one who swims spreads out hands to swim, but his pride will be humbled together with the craft of his hands. 
<span class="verse" id="IS25_12">12&#160;</span>He has brought the high fortress of your walls down, laid low, and brought to the ground, even to the dust.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_1">1&#160;</span>In that day, this song will be sung in the land of Judah: </div>
<div class='q'>“We have a strong city. </div>
<div class='q2'>God appoints salvation for walls and bulwarks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_2">2&#160;</span>Open the gates, that the righteous nation may enter: </div>
<div class='q2'>the one which keeps faith. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_3">3&#160;</span>You will keep whoever’s mind is steadfast in perfect peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he trusts in you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_4">4&#160;</span>Trust in Yahweh forever; </div>
<div class='q2'>for in Yah, Yahweh, is an everlasting Rock. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_5">5&#160;</span>For he has brought down those who dwell on high, the lofty city. </div>
<div class='q2'>He lays it low. </div>
<div class='q2'>He lays it low even to the ground. </div>
<div class='q2'>He brings it even to the dust. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_6">6&#160;</span>The foot shall tread it down, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the feet of the poor </div>
<div class='q2'>and the steps of the needy.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_7">7&#160;</span>The way of the just is uprightness. </div>
<div class='q2'>You who are upright make the path of the righteous level. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_8">8&#160;</span>Yes, in the way of your judgments, Yahweh, we have waited for you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your name and your renown are the desire of our soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_9">9&#160;</span>With my soul I have desired you in the night. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, with my spirit within me I will seek you earnestly; </div>
<div class='q2'>for when your judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_10">10&#160;</span>Let favor be shown to the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet he will not learn righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>In the land of uprightness he will deal wrongfully, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will not see Yahweh’s majesty. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh, your hand is lifted up, yet they don’t see; </div>
<div class='q2'>but they will see your zeal for the people and be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, fire will consume your adversaries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh, you will ordain peace for us, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have also done all our work for us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh our God, other lords besides you have had dominion over us, </div>
<div class='q2'>but we will only acknowledge your name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_14">14&#160;</span>The dead shall not live. </div>
<div class='q2'>The departed spirits shall not rise. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore you have visited and destroyed them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and caused all memory of them to perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_15">15&#160;</span>You have increased the nation, O Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have increased the nation! </div>
<div class='q'>You are glorified! </div>
<div class='q2'>You have enlarged all the borders of the land. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh, in trouble they have visited you. </div>
<div class='q2'>They poured out a prayer when your chastening was on them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_17">17&#160;</span>Just as a woman with child, who draws near the time of her delivery, </div>
<div class='q2'>is in pain and cries out in her pangs, </div>
<div class='q2'>so we have been before you, Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_18">18&#160;</span>We have been with child. </div>
<div class='q2'>We have been in pain. </div>
<div class='q'>We gave birth, it seems, only to wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>We have not worked any deliverance in the earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_19">19&#160;</span>Your dead shall live. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their dead bodies shall arise. </div>
<div class='q'>Awake and sing, you who dwell in the dust; </div>
<div class='q2'>for your dew is like the dew of herbs, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the earth will cast out the departed spirits. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_20">20&#160;</span>Come, my people, enter into your rooms, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shut your doors behind you. </div>
<div class='q'>Hide yourself for a little moment, </div>
<div class='q2'>until the indignation is past. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS26_21">21&#160;</span>For, behold, Yahweh comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>The earth also will disclose her blood, and will no longer cover her slain.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_1">1&#160;</span>In that day, Yahweh with his hard and great and strong sword will punish leviathan, the fleeing serpent, and leviathan, the twisted serpent; and he will kill the dragon that is in the sea. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_2">2&#160;</span>In that day, sing to her, “A pleasant vineyard! 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_3">3&#160;</span>I, Yahweh, am its keeper. I will water it every moment. Lest anyone damage it, I will keep it night and day. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_4">4&#160;</span>Wrath is not in me, but if I should find briers and thorns, I would do battle! I would march on them and I would burn them together. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_5">5&#160;</span>Or else let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me. Let him make peace with me.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_6">6&#160;</span>In days to come, Jacob will take root. Israel will blossom and bud. They will fill the surface of the world with fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_7">7&#160;</span>Has he struck them as he struck those who struck them? Or are they killed like those who killed them were killed? 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_8">8&#160;</span>In measure, when you send them away, you contend with them. He has removed them with his rough blast in the day of the east wind. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore by this the iniquity of Jacob will be forgiven, and this is all the fruit of taking away his sin: that he makes all the stones of the altar as chalk stones that are beaten in pieces, so that the Asherah poles and the incense altars shall rise no more. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_10">10&#160;</span>For the fortified city is solitary, a habitation deserted and forsaken, like the wilderness. The calf will feed there, and there he will lie down, and consume its branches. 
<span class="verse" id="IS27_11">11&#160;</span>When its boughs are withered, they will be broken off. The women will come and set them on fire, for they are a people of no understanding. Therefore he who made them will not have compassion on them, and he who formed them will show them no favor. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_12">12&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that Yahweh will thresh from the flowing stream of the Euphrates to the brook of Egypt; and you will be gathered one by one, children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS27_13">13&#160;</span>It will happen in that day that a great trumpet will be blown; and those who were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and those who were outcasts in the land of Egypt, shall come; and they will worship Yahweh in the holy mountain at Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS28_0'>28</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_1">1&#160;</span>Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fertile valley of those who are overcome with wine! 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_2">2&#160;</span>Behold, the Lord has one who is mighty and strong. Like a storm of hail, a destroying storm, and like a storm of mighty waters overflowing, he will cast them down to the earth with his hand. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_3">3&#160;</span>The crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim will be trodden under foot. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_4">4&#160;</span>The fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fertile valley, shall be like the first-ripe fig before the summer, which someone picks and eats as soon as he sees it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_5">5&#160;</span>In that day, Yahweh of Armies will become a crown of glory and a diadem of beauty to the residue of his people, 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_6">6&#160;</span>and a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment, and strength to those who turn back the battle at the gate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_7">7&#160;</span>They also reel with wine, and stagger with strong drink. The priest and the prophet reel with strong drink. They are swallowed up by wine. They stagger with strong drink. They err in vision. They stumble in judgment. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_8">8&#160;</span>For all tables are completely full of filthy vomit and filthiness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_9">9&#160;</span>Whom will he teach knowledge? To whom will he explain the message? Those who are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts? 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_10">10&#160;</span>For it is precept on precept, precept on precept; line on line, line on line; here a little, there a little. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_11">11&#160;</span>But he will speak to this nation with stammering lips and in another language, 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_12">12&#160;</span>to whom he said, “This is the resting place. Give rest to the weary,” and “This is the refreshing;” yet they would not hear. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh’s word will be to them precept on precept, precept on precept; line on line, line on line; here a little, there a little; that they may go, fall backward, be broken, be snared, and be taken. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_14">14&#160;</span>Therefore hear Yahweh’s word, you scoffers, that rule this people in Jerusalem: 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_15">15&#160;</span>“Because you have said, ‘We have made a covenant with death, and we are in agreement with Sheol.<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> When the overflowing scourge passes through, it won’t come to us; for we have made lies our refuge, and we have hidden ourselves under falsehood.’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord Yahweh says, “Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone of a sure foundation. He who believes shall not act hastily. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_17">17&#160;</span>I will make justice the measuring line, and righteousness the plumb line. The hail will sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters will overflow the hiding place. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_18">18&#160;</span>Your covenant with death shall be annulled, and your agreement with Sheol<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> shall not stand. When the overflowing scourge passes through, then you will be trampled down by it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_19">19&#160;</span>As often as it passes through, it will seize you; for morning by morning it will pass through, by day and by night; and it will be nothing but terror to understand the message.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_20">20&#160;</span>For the bed is too short to stretch out on, and the blanket is too narrow to wrap oneself in. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_21">21&#160;</span>For Yahweh will rise up as on Mount Perazim. He will be angry as in the valley of Gibeon; that he may do his work, his unusual work, and bring to pass his act, his extraordinary act. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_22">22&#160;</span>Now therefore don’t be scoffers, lest your bonds be made strong; for I have heard a decree of destruction from the Lord, Yahweh of Armies, on the whole earth. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS28_23">23&#160;</span>Give ear, and hear my voice! Listen, and hear my speech! 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_24">24&#160;</span>Does he who plows to sow plow continually? Does he keep turning the soil and breaking the clods? 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_25">25&#160;</span>When he has leveled its surface, doesn’t he plant the dill, and scatter the cumin seed, and put in the wheat in rows, the barley in the appointed place, and the spelt in its place? 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_26">26&#160;</span>For his God instructs him in right judgment and teaches him. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_27">27&#160;</span>For the dill isn’t threshed with a sharp instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned over the cumin; but the dill is beaten out with a stick, and the cumin with a rod. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_28">28&#160;</span>Bread flour must be ground; so he will not always be threshing it. Although he drives the wheel of his threshing cart over it, his horses don’t grind it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS28_29">29&#160;</span>This also comes out from Yahweh of Armies, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in wisdom.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_1">1&#160;</span>Woe to Ariel! Ariel, the city where David encamped! Add year to year; let the feasts come around; 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_2">2&#160;</span>then I will distress Ariel, and there will be mourning and lamentation. She shall be to me as an altar hearth.<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_3">3&#160;</span>I will encamp against you all around you, and will lay siege against you with posted troops. I will raise siege works against you. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_4">4&#160;</span>You will be brought down, and will speak out of the ground. Your speech will mumble out of the dust. Your voice will be as of one who has a familiar spirit, out of the ground, and your speech will whisper out of the dust. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_5">5&#160;</span>But the multitude of your foes will be like fine dust, and the multitude of the ruthless ones like chaff that blows away. Yes, it will be in an instant, suddenly. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_6">6&#160;</span>She will be visited by Yahweh of Armies with thunder, with earthquake, with great noise, with whirlwind and storm, and with the flame of a devouring fire. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_7">7&#160;</span>The multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all who fight against her and her stronghold, and who distress her, will be like a dream, a vision of the night. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_8">8&#160;</span>It will be like when a hungry man dreams, and behold, he eats; but he awakes, and his hunger isn’t satisfied; or like when a thirsty man dreams, and behold, he drinks; but he awakes, and behold, he is faint, and he is still thirsty. The multitude of all the nations that fight against Mount Zion will be like that. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_9">9&#160;</span>Pause and wonder! Blind yourselves and be blind! They are drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_10">10&#160;</span>For Yahweh has poured out on you a spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, the prophets; and he has covered your heads, the seers. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_11">11&#160;</span>All vision has become to you like the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one who is educated, saying, “Read this, please;” and he says, “I can’t, for it is sealed;” 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_12">12&#160;</span>and the book is delivered to one who is not educated, saying, “Read this, please;” and he says, “I can’t read.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_13">13&#160;</span>The Lord said, “Because this people draws near with their mouth and honors me with their lips, but they have removed their heart far from me, and their fear of me is a commandment of men which has been taught; 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_14">14&#160;</span>therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder; and the wisdom of their wise men will perish, and the understanding of their prudent men will be hidden.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_15">15&#160;</span>Woe to those who deeply hide their counsel from Yahweh, and whose deeds are in the dark, and who say, “Who sees us?” and “Who knows us?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_16">16&#160;</span>You turn things upside down! Should the potter be thought to be like clay, that the thing made should say about him who made it, “He didn’t make me;” or the thing formed say of him who formed it, “He has no understanding?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_17">17&#160;</span>Isn’t it yet a very little while, and Lebanon will be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field will be regarded as a forest? 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_18">18&#160;</span>In that day, the deaf will hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind will see out of obscurity and out of darkness. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_19">19&#160;</span>The humble also will increase their joy in Yahweh, and the poor among men will rejoice in the Holy One of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_20">20&#160;</span>For the ruthless is brought to nothing, and the scoffer ceases, and all those who are alert to do evil are cut off— 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_21">21&#160;</span>who cause a person to be indicted by a word, and lay a snare for one who reproves in the gate, and who deprive the innocent of justice with false testimony. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS29_22">22&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh, who redeemed Abraham, says concerning the house of Jacob: “Jacob shall no longer be ashamed, neither shall his face grow pale. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_23">23&#160;</span>But when he sees his children, the work of my hands, in the middle of him, they will sanctify my name. Yes, they will sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and will stand in awe of the God of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS29_24">24&#160;</span>They also who err in spirit will come to understanding, and those who grumble will receive instruction.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_1">1&#160;</span>“Woe to the rebellious children”, says Yahweh, “who take counsel, but not from me; and who make an alliance, but not with my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin; 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_2">2&#160;</span>who set out to go down into Egypt without asking for my advice, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt! 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore the strength of Pharaoh will be your shame, and the refuge in the shadow of Egypt your confusion. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_4">4&#160;</span>For their princes are at Zoan, and their ambassadors have come to Hanes. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_5">5&#160;</span>They shall all be ashamed because of a people that can’t profit them, that are not a help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_6">6&#160;</span>The burden of the animals of the South. </div>
<div class='p'>Through the land of trouble and anguish, of the lioness and the lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they carry their riches on the shoulders of young donkeys, and their treasures on the humps of camels, to an unprofitable people. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_7">7&#160;</span>For Egypt helps in vain, and to no purpose; therefore I have called her Rahab who sits still. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_8">8&#160;</span>Now go, write it before them on a tablet, and inscribe it in a book, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_9">9&#160;</span>For it is a rebellious people, lying children, children who will not hear Yahweh’s law; 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_10">10&#160;</span>who tell the seers, “Don’t see!” and the prophets, “Don’t prophesy to us right things. Tell us pleasant things. Prophesy deceits. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_11">11&#160;</span>Get out of the way. Turn away from the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore the Holy One of Israel says, “Because you despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and rely on it, 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_13">13&#160;</span>therefore this iniquity shall be to you like a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in an instant. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_14">14&#160;</span>He will break it as a potter’s vessel is broken, breaking it in pieces without sparing, so that there won’t be found among the broken pieces a piece good enough to take fire from the hearth, or to dip up water out of the cistern.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_15">15&#160;</span>For thus said the Lord Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel, “You will be saved in returning and rest. Your strength will be in quietness and in confidence.” You refused, 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_16">16&#160;</span>but you said, “No, for we will flee on horses;” therefore you will flee; and, “We will ride on the swift;” therefore those who pursue you will be swift. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_17">17&#160;</span>One thousand will flee at the threat of one. At the threat of five, you will flee until you are left like a beacon on the top of a mountain, and like a banner on a hill. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_18">18&#160;</span>Therefore Yahweh will wait, that he may be gracious to you; and therefore he will be exalted, that he may have mercy on you, for Yahweh is a God of justice. Blessed are all those who wait for him. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_19">19&#160;</span>For the people will dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. You will weep no more. He will surely be gracious to you at the voice of your cry. When he hears you, he will answer you. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_20">20&#160;</span>Though the Lord may give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet your teachers won’t be hidden any more, but your eyes will see your teachers; 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_21">21&#160;</span>and when you turn to the right hand, and when you turn to the left, your ears will hear a voice behind you, saying, “This is the way. Walk in it.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_22">22&#160;</span>You shall defile the overlaying of your engraved images of silver, and the plating of your molten images of gold. You shall cast them away as an unclean thing. You shall tell it, “Go away!” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_23">23&#160;</span>He will give the rain for your seed, with which you will sow the ground; and bread of the increase of the ground will be rich and plentiful. In that day, your livestock will feed in large pastures. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_24">24&#160;</span>The oxen likewise and the young donkeys that till the ground will eat savory feed, which has been winnowed with the shovel and with the fork. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_25">25&#160;</span>There will be brooks and streams of water on every lofty mountain and on every high hill in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_26">26&#160;</span>Moreover the light of the moon will be like the light of the sun, and the light of the sun will be seven times brighter, like the light of seven days, in the day that Yahweh binds up the fracture of his people, and heals the wound they were struck with. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS30_27">27&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh’s name comes from far away, burning with his anger, and in thick rising smoke. His lips are full of indignation. His tongue is as a devouring fire. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_28">28&#160;</span>His breath is as an overflowing stream that reaches even to the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction. A bridle that leads to ruin will be in the jaws of the peoples. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_29">29&#160;</span>You will have a song, as in the night when a holy feast is kept, and gladness of heart, as when one goes with a flute to come to Yahweh’s mountain, to Israel’s Rock. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_30">30&#160;</span>Yahweh will cause his glorious voice to be heard, and will show the descent of his arm, with the indignation of his anger and the flame of a devouring fire, with a blast, storm, and hailstones. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_31">31&#160;</span>For through Yahweh’s voice the Assyrian will be dismayed. He will strike him with his rod. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_32">32&#160;</span>Every stroke of the rod of punishment, which Yahweh will lay on him, will be with the sound of tambourines and harps. He will fight with them in battles, brandishing weapons. 
<span class="verse" id="IS30_33">33&#160;</span>For his burning place has long been ready. Yes, it is prepared for the king. He has made its pyre deep and large with fire and much wood. Yahweh’s breath, like a stream of sulfur, kindles it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS31_0'> 31</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_1">1&#160;</span>Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rely on horses, </div>
<div class='q2'>and trust in chariots because they are many, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in horsemen because they are very strong, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they don’t look to the Holy One of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they don’t seek Yahweh! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_2">2&#160;</span>Yet he also is wise, and will bring disaster, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will not call back his words, but will arise against the house of the evildoers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and against the help of those who work iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_3">3&#160;</span>Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; </div>
<div class='q2'>and their horses flesh, and not spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>When Yahweh stretches out his hand, both he who helps shall stumble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who is helped shall fall, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they all shall be consumed together. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_4">4&#160;</span>For Yahweh says to me, </div>
<div class='q'>“As the lion and the young lion growling over his prey, </div>
<div class='q2'>if a multitude of shepherds is called together against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>will not be dismayed at their voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor abase himself for their noise, </div>
<div class='q2'>so Yahweh of Armies will come down to fight on Mount Zion and on its heights. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_5">5&#160;</span>As birds hovering, so Yahweh of Armies will protect Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will protect and deliver it. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will pass over and preserve it.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_6">6&#160;</span>Return to him from whom you have deeply revolted, children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS31_7">7&#160;</span>For in that day everyone shall cast away his idols of silver and his idols of gold—sin which your own hands have made for you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_8">8&#160;</span>“The Assyrian will fall by the sword, not of man; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the sword, not of mankind, shall devour him. </div>
<div class='q'>He will flee from the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his young men will become subject to forced labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS31_9">9&#160;</span>His rock will pass away by reason of terror, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his princes will be afraid of the banner,” </div>
<div class='q'>says Yahweh, whose fire is in Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his furnace in Jerusalem.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS32_0'> 32</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_1">1&#160;</span>Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and princes shall rule in justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_2">2&#160;</span>A man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a covert from the storm, </div>
<div class='q2'>as streams of water in a dry place, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the shade of a large rock in a weary land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_3">3&#160;</span>The eyes of those who see will not be dim, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the ears of those who hear will listen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_4">4&#160;</span>The heart of the rash will understand knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the tongue of the stammerers will be ready to speak plainly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_5">5&#160;</span>The fool will no longer be called noble, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the scoundrel be highly respected. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_6">6&#160;</span>For the fool will speak folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his heart will work iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>to practice profanity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to utter error against Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>to make empty the soul of the hungry, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_7">7&#160;</span>The ways of the scoundrel are evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>He devises wicked plans to destroy the humble with lying words, </div>
<div class='q2'>even when the needy speaks right. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_8">8&#160;</span>But the noble devises noble things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will continue in noble things. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_9">9&#160;</span>Rise up, you women who are at ease! Hear my voice! </div>
<div class='q2'>You careless daughters, give ear to my speech! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_10">10&#160;</span>For days beyond a year you will be troubled, you careless women; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the vintage will fail. </div>
<div class='q2'>The harvest won’t come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_11">11&#160;</span>Tremble, you women who are at ease! </div>
<div class='q2'>Be troubled, you careless ones! </div>
<div class='q2'>Strip yourselves, make yourselves naked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and put sackcloth on your waist. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_12">12&#160;</span>Beat your breasts for the pleasant fields, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the fruitful vine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_13">13&#160;</span>Thorns and briers will come up on my people’s land; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, on all the houses of joy in the joyous city. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_14">14&#160;</span>For the palace will be forsaken. </div>
<div class='q2'>The populous city will be deserted. </div>
<div class='q2'>The hill and the watchtower will be for dens forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>a delight for wild donkeys, </div>
<div class='q2'>a pasture of flocks, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_15">15&#160;</span>until the Spirit is poured on us from on high, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wilderness becomes a fruitful field, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fruitful field is considered a forest. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_16">16&#160;</span>Then justice will dwell in the wilderness; </div>
<div class='q2'>and righteousness will remain in the fruitful field. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_17">17&#160;</span>The work of righteousness will be peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_18">18&#160;</span>My people will live in a peaceful habitation, </div>
<div class='q2'>in safe dwellings, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in quiet resting places, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_19">19&#160;</span>though hail flattens the forest, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the city is leveled completely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS32_20">20&#160;</span>Blessed are you who sow beside all waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>who send out the feet of the ox and the donkey.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS33_0'> 33</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_1">1&#160;</span>Woe to you who destroy, but you weren’t destroyed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who betray, but nobody betrayed you! </div>
<div class='q'>When you have finished destroying, you will be destroyed; </div>
<div class='q2'>and when you have finished betrayal, you will be betrayed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh, be gracious to us. We have waited for you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be our strength every morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>our salvation also in the time of trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_3">3&#160;</span>At the noise of the thunder, the peoples have fled. </div>
<div class='q2'>When you lift yourself up, the nations are scattered. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_4">4&#160;</span>Your plunder will be gathered as the caterpillar gathers. </div>
<div class='q2'>Men will leap on it as locusts leap. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh is exalted, for he dwells on high. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has filled Zion with justice and righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_6">6&#160;</span>There will be stability in your times, abundance of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fear of Yahweh is your treasure. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, their valiant ones cry outside; </div>
<div class='q2'>the ambassadors of peace weep bitterly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_8">8&#160;</span>The highways are desolate. </div>
<div class='q2'>The traveling man ceases. </div>
<div class='q2'>The covenant is broken. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has despised the cities. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t respect man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_9">9&#160;</span>The land mourns and languishes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lebanon is confounded and withers away. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sharon is like a desert, and Bashan and Carmel are stripped bare. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_10">10&#160;</span>“Now I will arise,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Now I will lift myself up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Now I will be exalted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_11">11&#160;</span>You will conceive chaff. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will give birth to stubble. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your breath is a fire that will devour you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_12">12&#160;</span>The peoples will be like the burning of lime, </div>
<div class='q2'>like thorns that are cut down and burned in the fire. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_13">13&#160;</span>Hear, you who are far off, what I have done; </div>
<div class='q2'>and, you who are near, acknowledge my might.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_14">14&#160;</span>The sinners in Zion are afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>Trembling has seized the godless ones. </div>
<div class='q'>Who among us can live with the devouring fire? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who among us can live with everlasting burning? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_15">15&#160;</span>He who walks righteously </div>
<div class='q2'>and speaks blamelessly, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who despises the gain of oppressions, </div>
<div class='q2'>who gestures with his hands, refusing to take a bribe, </div>
<div class='q2'>who stops his ears from hearing of bloodshed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shuts his eyes from looking at evil— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_16">16&#160;</span>he will dwell on high. </div>
<div class='q2'>His place of defense will be the fortress of rocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>His bread will be supplied. </div>
<div class='q2'>His waters will be sure. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_17">17&#160;</span>Your eyes will see the king in his beauty. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will see a distant land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_18">18&#160;</span>Your heart will meditate on the terror. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is he who counted? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is he who weighed? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is he who counted the towers? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_19">19&#160;</span>You will no longer see the fierce people, </div>
<div class='q2'>a people of a deep speech that you can’t comprehend, </div>
<div class='q2'>with a strange language that you can’t understand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_20">20&#160;</span>Look at Zion, the city of our appointed festivals. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your eyes will see Jerusalem, a quiet habitation, </div>
<div class='q2'>a tent that won’t be removed. </div>
<div class='q'>Its stakes will never be plucked up, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will any of its cords be broken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_21">21&#160;</span>But there Yahweh will be with us in majesty, </div>
<div class='q2'>a place of wide rivers and streams, </div>
<div class='q2'>in which no galley with oars will go, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will any gallant ship pass by there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_22">22&#160;</span>For Yahweh is our judge. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh is our lawgiver. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh is our king. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will save us. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_23">23&#160;</span>Your rigging is untied. </div>
<div class='q2'>They couldn’t strengthen the foot of their mast. </div>
<div class='q2'>They couldn’t spread the sail. </div>
<div class='q'>Then the prey of a great plunder was divided. </div>
<div class='q2'>The lame took the prey. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS33_24">24&#160;</span>The inhabitant won’t say, “I am sick.” </div>
<div class='q2'>The people who dwell therein will be forgiven their iniquity.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS34_0'> 34</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_1">1&#160;</span>Come near, you nations, to hear! </div>
<div class='q2'>Listen, you peoples. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let the earth and all it contains hear, </div>
<div class='q2'>the world, and everything that comes from it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_2">2&#160;</span>For Yahweh is enraged against all the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and angry with all their armies. </div>
<div class='q'>He has utterly destroyed them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has given them over for slaughter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_3">3&#160;</span>Their slain will also be cast out, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the stench of their dead bodies will come up. </div>
<div class='q2'>The mountains will melt in their blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_4">4&#160;</span>All of the army of the sky will be dissolved. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sky will be rolled up like a scroll, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all its armies will fade away, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a leaf fades from off a vine or a fig tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_5">5&#160;</span>For my sword has drunk its fill in the sky. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, it will come down on Edom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on the people of my curse, for judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh’s sword is filled with blood. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is covered with fat, with the blood of lambs and goats, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the fat of the kidneys of rams; </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has a sacrifice in Bozrah, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a great slaughter in the land of Edom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_7">7&#160;</span>The wild oxen will come down with them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the young bulls with the mighty bulls; </div>
<div class='q2'>and their land will be drunken with blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their dust made greasy with fat. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_8">8&#160;</span>For Yahweh has a day of vengeance, </div>
<div class='q2'>a year of recompense for the cause of Zion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_9">9&#160;</span>Its streams will be turned into pitch, </div>
<div class='q2'>its dust into sulfur, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its land will become burning pitch. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_10">10&#160;</span>It won’t be quenched night or day. </div>
<div class='q2'>Its smoke will go up forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>From generation to generation, it will lie waste. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will pass through it forever and ever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_11">11&#160;</span>But the pelican and the porcupine will possess it. </div>
<div class='q2'>The owl and the raven will dwell in it. </div>
<div class='q'>He will stretch the line of confusion over it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the plumb line of emptiness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_12">12&#160;</span>They shall call its nobles to the kingdom, but none shall be there; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all its princes shall be nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_13">13&#160;</span>Thorns will come up in its palaces, </div>
<div class='q2'>nettles and thistles in its fortresses; </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will be a habitation of jackals, </div>
<div class='q2'>a court for ostriches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_14">14&#160;</span>The wild animals of the desert will meet with the wolves, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wild goat will cry to his fellow. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, the night creature<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> shall settle there, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shall find herself a place of rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_15">15&#160;</span>The arrow snake will make her nest there, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lay, hatch, and gather under her shade. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, the kites will be gathered there, every one with her mate. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_16">16&#160;</span>Search in the book of Yahweh, and read: </div>
<div class='q2'>not one of these will be missing. </div>
<div class='q2'>None will lack her mate. </div>
<div class='q2'>For my mouth has commanded, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his Spirit has gathered them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS34_17">17&#160;</span>He has cast the lot for them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his hand has divided it to them with a measuring line. </div>
<div class='q2'>They shall possess it forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>From generation to generation they will dwell in it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS35_0'> 35</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_1">1&#160;</span>The wilderness and the dry land will be glad. </div>
<div class='q2'>The desert will rejoice and blossom like a rose. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_2">2&#160;</span>It will blossom abundantly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rejoice even with joy and singing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lebanon’s glory will be given to it, </div>
<div class='q2'>the excellence of Carmel and Sharon. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will see Yahweh’s glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>the excellence of our God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_3">3&#160;</span>Strengthen the weak hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make the feeble knees firm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_4">4&#160;</span>Tell those who have a fearful heart, “Be strong! </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be afraid! </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, your God will come with vengeance, God’s retribution. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will come and save you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_5">5&#160;</span>Then the eyes of the blind will be opened, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the ears of the deaf will be unstopped. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_6">6&#160;</span>Then the lame man will leap like a deer, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the tongue of the mute will sing; </div>
<div class='q2'>for waters will break out in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and streams in the desert. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_7">7&#160;</span>The burning sand will become a pool, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the thirsty ground springs of water. </div>
<div class='q2'>Grass with reeds and rushes will be in the habitation of jackals, where they lay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_8">8&#160;</span>A highway will be there, a road, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will be called “The Holy Way”. </div>
<div class='q'>The unclean shall not pass over it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it will be for those who walk in the Way. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wicked fools shall not go there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_9">9&#160;</span>No lion will be there, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will any ravenous animal go up on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will not be found there; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the redeemed will walk there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS35_10">10&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s ransomed ones will return, </div>
<div class='q2'>and come with singing to Zion; </div>
<div class='q2'>and everlasting joy will be on their heads. </div>
<div class='q'>They will obtain gladness and joy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sorrow and sighing will flee away.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS36_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_1">1&#160;</span>Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria attacked all of the fortified cities of Judah and captured them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_2">2&#160;</span>The king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem to king Hezekiah with a large army. He stood by the aqueduct from the upper pool in the fuller’s field highway. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_3">3&#160;</span>Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph the recorder came out to him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_4">4&#160;</span>Rabshakeh said to them, “Now tell Hezekiah, ‘The great king, the king of Assyria, says, “What confidence is this in which you trust? 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_5">5&#160;</span>I say that your counsel and strength for the war are only vain words. Now in whom do you trust, that you have rebelled against me? 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_6">6&#160;</span>Behold, you trust in the staff of this bruised reed, even in Egypt, which if a man leans on it, it will go into his hand and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in him. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_7">7&#160;</span>But if you tell me, ‘We trust in Yahweh our God,’ isn’t that he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, ‘You shall worship before this altar?’ ” 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_8">8&#160;</span>Now therefore, please make a pledge to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give you two thousand horses, if you are able on your part to set riders on them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_9">9&#160;</span>How then can you turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master’s servants, and put your trust in Egypt for chariots and for horsemen? 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_10">10&#160;</span>Have I come up now without Yahweh against this land to destroy it? Yahweh said to me, “Go up against this land, and destroy it.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_11">11&#160;</span>Then Eliakim, Shebna and Joah said to Rabshakeh, “Please speak to your servants in Aramaic, for we understand it. Don’t speak to us in the Jews’ language in the hearing of the people who are on the wall.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_12">12&#160;</span>But Rabshakeh said, “Has my master sent me only to your master and to you, to speak these words, and not to the men who sit on the wall, who will eat their own dung and drink their own urine with you?” 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_13">13&#160;</span>Then Rabshakeh stood, and called out with a loud voice in the Jews’ language, and said, “Hear the words of the great king, the king of Assyria! 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_14">14&#160;</span>The king says, ‘Don’t let Hezekiah deceive you; for he will not be able to deliver you. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t let Hezekiah make you trust in Yahweh, saying, “Yahweh will surely deliver us. This city won’t be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” ’ 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_16">16&#160;</span>Don’t listen to Hezekiah, for the king of Assyria says, ‘Make your peace with me, and come out to me; and each of you eat from his vine, and each one from his fig tree, and each one of you drink the waters of his own cistern; 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_17">17&#160;</span>until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards. 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_18">18&#160;</span>Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, “Yahweh will deliver us.” Have any of the gods of the nations delivered their lands from the hand of the king of Assyria? 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_19">19&#160;</span>Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? Have they delivered Samaria from my hand? 
<span class="verse" id="IS36_20">20&#160;</span>Who are they among all the gods of these countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Yahweh should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_21">21&#160;</span>But they remained silent, and said nothing in reply, for the king’s commandment was, “Don’t answer him.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS36_22">22&#160;</span>Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS37_0'>37</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_1">1&#160;</span>When king Hezekiah heard it, he tore his clothes, covered himself with sackcloth, and went into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_2">2&#160;</span>He sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_3">3&#160;</span>They said to him, “Hezekiah says, ‘Today is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of rejection; for the children have come to the birth, and there is no strength to give birth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_4">4&#160;</span>It may be Yahweh your God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which Yahweh your God has heard. Therefore lift up your prayer for the remnant that is left.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_5">5&#160;</span>So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_6">6&#160;</span>Isaiah said to them, “Tell your master, ‘Yahweh says, “Don’t be afraid of the words that you have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, I will put a spirit in him and he will hear news, and will return to his own land. I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.” ’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_8">8&#160;</span>So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he heard that he had departed from Lachish. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_9">9&#160;</span>He heard news concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, “He has come out to fight against you.” When he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_10">10&#160;</span>“Thus you shall speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, ‘Don’t let your God in whom you trust deceive you, saying, “Jerusalem won’t be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, you have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. Shall you be delivered? 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_12">12&#160;</span>Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the children of Eden who were in Telassar? 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_13">13&#160;</span>Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_14">14&#160;</span>Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers and read it. Then Hezekiah went up to Yahweh’s house, and spread it before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_15">15&#160;</span>Hezekiah prayed to Yahweh, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_16">16&#160;</span>“Yahweh of Armies, the God of Israel, who is enthroned among the cherubim, you are the God, even you alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. You have made heaven and earth. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_17">17&#160;</span>Turn your ear, Yahweh, and hear. Open your eyes, Yahweh, and behold. Hear all of the words of Sennacherib, who has sent to defy the living God. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_18">18&#160;</span>Truly, Yahweh, the kings of Assyria have destroyed all the countries and their land, 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_19">19&#160;</span>and have cast their gods into the fire; for they were no gods, but the work of men’s hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_20">20&#160;</span>Now therefore, Yahweh our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that you are Yahweh, even you only.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_21">21&#160;</span>Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, “Yahweh, the God of Israel says, ‘Because you have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_22">22&#160;</span>this is the word which Yahweh has spoken concerning him: The virgin daughter of Zion has despised you and ridiculed you. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at you. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_23">23&#160;</span>Whom have you defied and blasphemed? Against whom have you exalted your voice and lifted up your eyes on high? Against the Holy One of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_24">24&#160;</span>By your servants, you have defied the Lord, and have said, “With the multitude of my chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon. I will cut down its tall cedars and its choice cypress trees. I will enter into its farthest height, the forest of its fruitful field. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_25">25&#160;</span>I have dug and drunk water, and with the sole of my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_26">26&#160;</span>“ ‘Have you not heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it in ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that it should be yours to destroy fortified cities, turning them into ruinous heaps. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_27">27&#160;</span>Therefore their inhabitants had little power. They were dismayed and confounded. They were like the grass of the field, and like the green herb, like the grass on the housetops, and like a field before its crop has grown. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_28">28&#160;</span>But I know your sitting down, your going out, your coming in, and your raging against me. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_29">29&#160;</span>Because of your raging against me, and because your arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in your nose and my bridle in your lips, and I will turn you back by the way by which you came. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_30">30&#160;</span>“ ‘This shall be the sign to you: You will eat this year that which grows of itself, and in the second year that which springs from it; and in the third year sow and reap and plant vineyards, and eat their fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_31">31&#160;</span>The remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah will again take root downward, and bear fruit upward. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_32">32&#160;</span>For out of Jerusalem a remnant will go out, and survivors will escape from Mount Zion. The zeal of Yahweh of Armies will perform this.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_33">33&#160;</span>“Therefore Yahweh says concerning the king of Assyria, ‘He will not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither will he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_34">34&#160;</span>He will return the way that he came, and he won’t come to this city,’ says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_35">35&#160;</span>‘For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake, and for my servant David’s sake.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS37_36">36&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s angel went out and struck one hundred and eighty-five thousand men in the camp of the Assyrians. When men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_37">37&#160;</span>So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, went away, returned to Nineveh, and stayed there. 
<span class="verse" id="IS37_38">38&#160;</span>As he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons struck him with the sword; and they escaped into the land of Ararat. Esar Haddon his son reigned in his place.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS38_0'>38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_1">1&#160;</span>In those days Hezekiah was sick and near death. Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came to him, and said to him, “Yahweh says, ‘Set your house in order, for you will die, and not live.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_2">2&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to Yahweh, 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_3">3&#160;</span>and said, “Remember now, Yahweh, I beg you, how I have walked before you in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in your sight.” Then Hezekiah wept bitterly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_4">4&#160;</span>Then Yahweh’s word came to Isaiah, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_5">5&#160;</span>“Go, and tell Hezekiah, ‘Yahweh, the God of David your father, says, “I have heard your prayer. I have seen your tears. Behold, I will add fifteen years to your life. 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_6">6&#160;</span>I will deliver you and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city. 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_7">7&#160;</span>This shall be the sign to you from Yahweh, that Yahweh will do this thing that he has spoken. 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_8">8&#160;</span>Behold, I will cause the shadow on the sundial, which has gone down on the sundial of Ahaz with the sun, to return backward ten steps.” ’ ” So the sun returned ten steps on the sundial on which it had gone down. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_9">9&#160;</span>The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and had recovered of his sickness: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_10">10&#160;</span>I said, “In the middle of my life I go into the gates of Sheol.<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>I am deprived of the residue of my years.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_11">11&#160;</span>I said, “I won’t see Yah, </div>
<div class='q2'>Yah in the land of the living. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will see man no more with the inhabitants of the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_12">12&#160;</span>My dwelling is removed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is carried away from me like a shepherd’s tent. </div>
<div class='q'>I have rolled up my life like a weaver. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will cut me off from the loom. </div>
<div class='q2'>From day even to night you will make an end of me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_13">13&#160;</span>I waited patiently until morning. </div>
<div class='q2'>He breaks all my bones like a lion. </div>
<div class='q2'>From day even to night you will make an end of me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_14">14&#160;</span>I chattered like a swallow or a crane. </div>
<div class='q2'>I moaned like a dove. </div>
<div class='q2'>My eyes weaken looking upward. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lord, I am oppressed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be my security.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_15">15&#160;</span>What will I say? </div>
<div class='q2'>He has both spoken to me, and himself has done it. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will walk carefully all my years because of the anguish of my soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_16">16&#160;</span>Lord, men live by these things; </div>
<div class='q2'>and my spirit finds life in all of them. </div>
<div class='q2'>You restore me, and cause me to live. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_17">17&#160;</span>Behold, for peace I had great anguish, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you have in love for my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have cast all my sins behind your back. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_18">18&#160;</span>For Sheol<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> can’t praise you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Death can’t celebrate you. </div>
<div class='q'>Those who go down into the pit can’t hope for your truth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_19">19&#160;</span>The living, the living, he shall praise you, as I do today. </div>
<div class='q2'>The father shall make known your truth to the children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_20">20&#160;</span>Yahweh will save me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore we will sing my songs with stringed instruments all the days of our life in Yahweh’s house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS38_21">21&#160;</span>Now Isaiah had said, “Let them take a cake of figs, and lay it for a poultice on the boil, and he shall recover.” 
<span class="verse" id="IS38_22">22&#160;</span>Hezekiah also had said, “What is the sign that I will go up to Yahweh’s house?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS39_0'>39</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_1">1&#160;</span>At that time, Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he had been sick, and had recovered. 
<span class="verse" id="IS39_2">2&#160;</span>Hezekiah was pleased with them, and showed them the house of his precious things, the silver, the gold, the spices, and the precious oil, and all the house of his armor, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah didn’t show them. 
<span class="verse" id="IS39_3">3&#160;</span>Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah, and asked him, “What did these men say? From where did they come to you?” </div>
<div class='p'>Hezekiah said, “They have come from a country far from me, even from Babylon.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_4">4&#160;</span>Then he asked, “What have they seen in your house?” </div>
<div class='p'>Hezekiah answered, “They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_5">5&#160;</span>Then Isaiah said to Hezekiah, “Hear the word of Yahweh of Armies: 
<span class="verse" id="IS39_6">6&#160;</span>‘Behold, the days are coming when all that is in your house, and that which your fathers have stored up until today, will be carried to Babylon. Nothing will be left,’ says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS39_7">7&#160;</span>‘They will take away your sons who will issue from you, whom you shall father, and they will be eunuchs in the king of Babylon’s palace.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS39_8">8&#160;</span>Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, “Yahweh’s word which you have spoken is good.” He said moreover, “For there will be peace and truth in my days.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS40_0'>40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_1">1&#160;</span>“Comfort, comfort my people,” says your God. 
<span class="verse" id="IS40_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak comfortably to Jerusalem, and call out to her that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, that she has received of Yahweh’s hand double for all her sins.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_3">3&#160;</span>The voice of one who calls out, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Prepare the way of Yahweh in the wilderness! </div>
<div class='q2'>Make a level highway in the desert for our God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_4">4&#160;</span>Every valley shall be exalted, </div>
<div class='q2'>and every mountain and hill shall be made low. </div>
<div class='q2'>The uneven shall be made level, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rough places a plain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_5">5&#160;</span>Yahweh’s glory shall be revealed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all flesh shall see it together; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the mouth of Yahweh has spoken it.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_6">6&#160;</span>The voice of one saying, “Cry out!” </div>
<div class='q2'>One said, “What shall I cry?” </div>
<div class='q'>“All flesh is like grass, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all its glory is like the flower of the field. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_7">7&#160;</span>The grass withers, </div>
<div class='q2'>the flower fades, </div>
<div class='q2'>because Yahweh’s breath blows on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely the people are like grass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_8">8&#160;</span>The grass withers, </div>
<div class='q2'>the flower fades; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the word of our God stands forever.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_9">9&#160;</span>You who tell good news to Zion, go up on a high mountain. </div>
<div class='q2'>You who tell good news to Jerusalem, lift up your voice with strength! </div>
<div class='q2'>Lift it up! Don’t be afraid! </div>
<div class='q2'>Say to the cities of Judah, “Behold, your God!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, the Lord Yahweh will come as a mighty one, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his arm will rule for him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, his reward is with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his recompense before him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_11">11&#160;</span>He will feed his flock like a shepherd. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will gather the lambs in his arm, </div>
<div class='q2'>and carry them in his bosom. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will gently lead those who have their young. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_12">12&#160;</span>Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and marked off the sky with his span, </div>
<div class='q2'>and calculated the dust of the earth in a measuring basket, </div>
<div class='q2'>and weighed the mountains in scales, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the hills in a balance? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_13">13&#160;</span>Who has directed Yahweh’s Spirit, </div>
<div class='q2'>or has taught him as his counselor? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_14">14&#160;</span>Who did he take counsel with, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who instructed him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and taught him in the path of justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and taught him knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and showed him the way of understanding? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, the nations are like a drop in a bucket, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are regarded as a speck of dust on a balance. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, he lifts up the islands like a very little thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_16">16&#160;</span>Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor its animals sufficient for a burnt offering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_17">17&#160;</span>All the nations are like nothing before him. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are regarded by him as less than nothing, and vanity. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_18">18&#160;</span>To whom then will you liken God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or what likeness will you compare to him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_19">19&#160;</span>A workman has cast an image, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the goldsmith overlays it with gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>and casts silver chains for it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_20">20&#160;</span>He who is too impoverished for such an offering chooses a tree that will not rot. </div>
<div class='q2'>He seeks a skillful workman to set up a carved image for him that will not be moved. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_21">21&#160;</span>Haven’t you known? </div>
<div class='q2'>Haven’t you heard? </div>
<div class='q2'>Haven’t you been told from the beginning? </div>
<div class='q2'>Haven’t you understood from the foundations of the earth? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_22">22&#160;</span>It is he who sits above the circle of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its inhabitants are like grasshoppers; </div>
<div class='q2'>who stretches out the heavens like a curtain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and spreads them out like a tent to dwell in, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_23">23&#160;</span>who brings princes to nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>who makes the judges of the earth meaningless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_24">24&#160;</span>They are planted scarcely. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are sown scarcely. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their stock has scarcely taken root in the ground. </div>
<div class='q2'>He merely blows on them, and they wither, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the whirlwind takes them away as stubble. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_25">25&#160;</span>“To whom then will you liken me? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is my equal?” says the Holy One. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_26">26&#160;</span>Lift up your eyes on high, </div>
<div class='q2'>and see who has created these, </div>
<div class='q2'>who brings out their army by number. </div>
<div class='q2'>He calls them all by name. </div>
<div class='q2'>by the greatness of his might, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because he is strong in power, </div>
<div class='q2'>not one is lacking. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_27">27&#160;</span>Why do you say, Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and speak, Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>“My way is hidden from Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the justice due me is disregarded by my God?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_28">28&#160;</span>Haven’t you known? </div>
<div class='q2'>Haven’t you heard? </div>
<div class='q2'>The everlasting God, Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Creator of the ends of the earth, doesn’t faint. </div>
<div class='q2'>He isn’t weary. </div>
<div class='q2'>His understanding is unsearchable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_29">29&#160;</span>He gives power to the weak. </div>
<div class='q2'>He increases the strength of him who has no might. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_30">30&#160;</span>Even the youths faint and get weary, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the young men utterly fall; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS40_31">31&#160;</span>but those who wait for Yahweh will renew their strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will mount up with wings like eagles. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will run, and not be weary. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will walk, and not faint.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS41_0'> 41</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_1">1&#160;</span>“Keep silent before me, islands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let the peoples renew their strength. </div>
<div class='q'>Let them come near, </div>
<div class='q2'>then let them speak. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s meet together for judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_2">2&#160;</span>Who has raised up one from the east? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who called him to his feet in righteousness? </div>
<div class='q2'>He hands over nations to him </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes him rule over kings. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gives them like the dust to his sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>like the driven stubble to his bow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_3">3&#160;</span>He pursues them </div>
<div class='q2'>and passes by safely, </div>
<div class='q2'>even by a way that he had not gone with his feet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_4">4&#160;</span>Who has worked and done it, </div>
<div class='q2'>calling the generations from the beginning? </div>
<div class='q2'>I, Yahweh, the first, and with the last, I am he.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_5">5&#160;</span>The islands have seen, and fear. </div>
<div class='q2'>The ends of the earth tremble. </div>
<div class='q2'>They approach, and come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_6">6&#160;</span>Everyone helps his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q2'>They say to their brothers, “Be strong!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_7">7&#160;</span>So the carpenter encourages the goldsmith. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who smooths with the hammer encourages him who strikes the anvil, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying of the soldering, “It is good;” </div>
<div class='q2'>and he fastens it with nails, that it might not totter. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_8">8&#160;</span>“But you, Israel, my servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>Jacob whom I have chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>the offspring of Abraham my friend, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_9">9&#160;</span>you whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and called from its corners, </div>
<div class='q2'>and said to you, ‘You are my servant. I have chosen you and have not cast you away.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t you be afraid, for I am with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be dismayed, for I am your God. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will strengthen you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I will help you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I will uphold you with the right hand of my righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, all those who are incensed against you will be disappointed and confounded. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who strive with you will be like nothing, and shall perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_12">12&#160;</span>You will seek them, and won’t find them, </div>
<div class='q2'>even those who contend with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who war against you will be as nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a nonexistent thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_13">13&#160;</span>For I, Yahweh your God, will hold your right hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying to you, ‘Don’t be afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will help you.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid, you worm Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you men of Israel. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will help you,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Your Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, I have made you into a new sharp threshing instrument with teeth. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will thresh the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beat them small, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make the hills like chaff. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_16">16&#160;</span>You will winnow them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wind will carry them away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the whirlwind will scatter them. </div>
<div class='q'>You will rejoice in Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will glory in the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_17">17&#160;</span>The poor and needy seek water, and there is none. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their tongue fails for thirst. </div>
<div class='q'>I, Yahweh, will answer them. </div>
<div class='q2'>I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_18">18&#160;</span>I will open rivers on the bare heights, </div>
<div class='q2'>and springs in the middle of the valleys. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make the wilderness a pool of water, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the dry land springs of water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_19">19&#160;</span>I will put cedar, acacia, myrtle, and oil trees in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will set cypress trees, pine, and box trees together in the desert; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_20">20&#160;</span>that they may see, know, consider, and understand together, </div>
<div class='q2'>that Yahweh’s hand has done this, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Holy One of Israel has created it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_21">21&#160;</span>Produce your cause,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Bring out your strong reasons!” says the King of Jacob. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_22">22&#160;</span>“Let them announce and declare to us what will happen! </div>
<div class='q2'>Declare the former things, what they are, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; </div>
<div class='q2'>or show us things to come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_23">23&#160;</span>Declare the things that are to come hereafter, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may know that you are gods. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, do good, or do evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may be dismayed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and see it together. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_24">24&#160;</span>Behold, you are nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your work is nothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who chooses you is an abomination. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_25">25&#160;</span>“I have raised up one from the north, and he has come, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the rising of the sun, one who calls on my name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he shall come on rulers as on mortar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the potter treads clay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_26">26&#160;</span>Who has declared it from the beginning, that we may know? </div>
<div class='q2'>and before, that we may say, ‘He is right?’ </div>
<div class='q'>Surely, there is no one who declares. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely, there is no one who shows. </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely, there is no one who hears your words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_27">27&#160;</span>I am the first to say to Zion, ‘Behold, look at them;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will give one who brings good news to Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_28">28&#160;</span>When I look, there is no man, </div>
<div class='q2'>even among them there is no counselor who, when I ask, can answer a word. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS41_29">29&#160;</span>Behold, all of their deeds are vanity and nothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their molten images are wind and confusion.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS42_0'> 42</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_1">1&#160;</span>“Behold, my servant, whom I uphold, </div>
<div class='q2'>my chosen, in whom my soul delights: </div>
<div class='q2'>I have put my Spirit on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will bring justice to the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_2">2&#160;</span>He will not shout, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor raise his voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor cause it to be heard in the street. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_3">3&#160;</span>He won’t break a bruised reed. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t quench a dimly burning wick. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will faithfully bring justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_4">4&#160;</span>He will not fail nor be discouraged, </div>
<div class='q2'>until he has set justice in the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the islands wait for his law.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_5">5&#160;</span>God Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who created the heavens and stretched them out, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who spread out the earth and that which comes out of it, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who gives breath to its people and spirit to those who walk in it, says: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_6">6&#160;</span>“I, Yahweh, have called you in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will hold your hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will keep you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make you a covenant for the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a light for the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_7">7&#160;</span>to open the blind eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>to bring the prisoners out of the dungeon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who sit in darkness out of the prison. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_8">8&#160;</span>“I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>That is my name. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will not give my glory to another, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor my praise to engraved images. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, the former things have happened </div>
<div class='q2'>and I declare new things. </div>
<div class='q2'>I tell you about them before they come up.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_10">10&#160;</span>Sing to Yahweh a new song, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his praise from the end of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who go down to the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all that is therein, </div>
<div class='q2'>the islands and their inhabitants. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_11">11&#160;</span>Let the wilderness and its cities raise their voices, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the villages that Kedar inhabits. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let the inhabitants of Sela sing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let them shout from the top of the mountains! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_12">12&#160;</span>Let them give glory to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and declare his praise in the islands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh will go out like a mighty man. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will stir up zeal like a man of war. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will raise a war cry. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he will shout aloud. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will triumph over his enemies. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_14">14&#160;</span>“I have been silent a long time. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have been quiet and restrained myself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Now I will cry out like a travailing woman. I will both gasp and pant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_15">15&#160;</span>I will destroy mountains and hills, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dry up all their herbs. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make the rivers islands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will dry up the pools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_16">16&#160;</span>I will bring the blind by a way that they don’t know. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will lead them in paths that they don’t know. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make darkness light before them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and crooked places straight. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will do these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will not forsake them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_17">17&#160;</span>“Those who trust in engraved images, </div>
<div class='q2'>who tell molten images, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘You are our gods,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>will be turned back. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will be utterly disappointed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_18">18&#160;</span>“Hear, you deaf, </div>
<div class='q2'>and look, you blind, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may see. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_19">19&#160;</span>Who is blind, but my servant? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who is as deaf as my messenger whom I send? </div>
<div class='q'>Who is as blind as he who is at peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as blind as Yahweh’s servant? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_20">20&#160;</span>You see many things, but don’t observe. </div>
<div class='q2'>His ears are open, but he doesn’t listen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_21">21&#160;</span>It pleased Yahweh, for his righteousness’ sake, to magnify the law </div>
<div class='q2'>and make it honorable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_22">22&#160;</span>But this is a robbed and plundered people. </div>
<div class='q2'>All of them are snared in holes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they are hidden in prisons. </div>
<div class='q'>They have become captives, and no one delivers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a plunder, and no one says, ‘Restore them!’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_23">23&#160;</span>Who is there among you who will give ear to this? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will listen and hear for the time to come? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_24">24&#160;</span>Who gave Jacob as plunder, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel to the robbers? </div>
<div class='q2'>Didn’t Yahweh, he against whom we have sinned? </div>
<div class='q2'>For they would not walk in his ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they disobeyed his law. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS42_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore he poured the fierceness of his anger on him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the strength of battle. </div>
<div class='q'>It set him on fire all around, but he didn’t know. </div>
<div class='q2'>It burned him, but he didn’t take it to heart.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS43_0'> 43</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_1">1&#160;</span>But now Yahweh who created you, Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who formed you, Israel, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Don’t be afraid, for I have redeemed you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have called you by your name. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are mine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_2">2&#160;</span>When you pass through the waters, I will be with you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and through the rivers, they will not overflow you. </div>
<div class='q'>When you walk through the fire, you will not be burned, </div>
<div class='q2'>and flame will not scorch you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_3">3&#160;</span>For I am Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Holy One of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>your Savior. </div>
<div class='q'>I have given Egypt as your ransom, </div>
<div class='q2'>Ethiopia and Seba in your place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_4">4&#160;</span>Since you have been precious and honored in my sight, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have loved you, </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore I will give people in your place, </div>
<div class='q2'>and nations instead of your life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_5">5&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid, for I am with you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will bring your offspring from the east, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gather you from the west. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_6">6&#160;</span>I will tell the north, ‘Give them up!’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and tell the south, ‘Don’t hold them back! </div>
<div class='q2'>Bring my sons from far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my daughters from the ends of the earth— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_7">7&#160;</span>everyone who is called by my name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and whom I have created for my glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom I have formed, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, whom I have made.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_8">8&#160;</span>Bring out the blind people who have eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the deaf who have ears. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_9">9&#160;</span>Let all the nations be gathered together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let the peoples be assembled. </div>
<div class='q'>Who among them can declare this, </div>
<div class='q2'>and show us former things? </div>
<div class='q'>Let them bring their witnesses, that they may be justified, </div>
<div class='q2'>or let them hear, and say, “That is true.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_10">10&#160;</span>“You are my witnesses,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“With my servant whom I have chosen; </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may know and believe me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and understand that I am he. </div>
<div class='q'>Before me there was no God formed, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will there be after me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_11">11&#160;</span>I myself am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>Besides me, there is no savior. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_12">12&#160;</span>I have declared, I have saved, and I have shown, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there was no strange god among you. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore you are my witnesses”, </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh, “and I am God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_13">13&#160;</span>Yes, since the day was, I am he. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no one who can deliver out of my hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will work, and who can hinder it?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel says: “For your sake, I have sent to Babylon, and I will bring all of them down as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing. 
<span class="verse" id="IS43_15">15&#160;</span>I am Yahweh, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh, who makes a way in the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a path in the mighty waters, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_17">17&#160;</span>who brings out the chariot and horse, </div>
<div class='q2'>the army and the mighty man </div>
<div class='q2'>(they lie down together, they shall not rise; </div>
<div class='q2'>they are extinct, they are quenched like a wick) says: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_18">18&#160;</span>“Don’t remember the former things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t consider the things of old. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, I will do a new thing. </div>
<div class='q2'>It springs out now. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t you know it? </div>
<div class='q'>I will even make a way in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rivers in the desert. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_20">20&#160;</span>The animals of the field, the jackals and the ostriches, shall honor me, </div>
<div class='q2'>because I give water in the wilderness and rivers in the desert, </div>
<div class='q2'>to give drink to my people, my chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_21">21&#160;</span>the people which I formed for myself, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they might declare my praise. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_22">22&#160;</span>Yet you have not called on me, Jacob; </div>
<div class='q2'>but you have been weary of me, Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_23">23&#160;</span>You have not brought me any of your sheep for burnt offerings, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither have you honored me with your sacrifices. </div>
<div class='q'>I have not burdened you with offerings, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor wearied you with frankincense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_24">24&#160;</span>You have bought me no sweet cane with money, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor have you filled me with the fat of your sacrifices, </div>
<div class='q'>but you have burdened me with your sins. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have wearied me with your iniquities. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_25">25&#160;</span>I, even I, am he who blots out your transgressions for my own sake; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will not remember your sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_26">26&#160;</span>Put me in remembrance. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let us plead together. </div>
<div class='q'>Declare your case, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be justified. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_27">27&#160;</span>Your first father sinned, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your teachers have transgressed against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS43_28">28&#160;</span>Therefore I will profane the princes of the sanctuary; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will make Jacob a curse, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel an insult.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS44_0'> 44</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_1">1&#160;</span>Yet listen now, Jacob my servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel, whom I have chosen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_2">2&#160;</span>This is what Yahweh who made you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and formed you from the womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>who will help you says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Don’t be afraid, Jacob my servant; </div>
<div class='q2'>and you, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_3">3&#160;</span>For I will pour water on him who is thirsty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and streams on the dry ground. </div>
<div class='q'>I will pour my Spirit on your descendants, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my blessing on your offspring; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_4">4&#160;</span>and they will spring up among the grass, </div>
<div class='q2'>as willows by the watercourses. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_5">5&#160;</span>One will say, ‘I am Yahweh’s.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>Another will be called by the name of Jacob; </div>
<div class='q2'>and another will write with his hand ‘to Yahweh,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and honor the name of Israel.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_6">6&#160;</span>This is what Yahweh, the King of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his Redeemer, Yahweh of Armies, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“I am the first, and I am the last; </div>
<div class='q2'>and besides me there is no God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_7">7&#160;</span>Who is like me? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will call, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will declare it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and set it in order for me, </div>
<div class='q2'>since I established the ancient people? </div>
<div class='q'>Let them declare the things that are coming, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that will happen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither be afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>Haven’t I declared it to you long ago, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shown it? </div>
<div class='q'>You are my witnesses. </div>
<div class='q2'>Is there a God besides me? </div>
<div class='q'>Indeed, there is not. </div>
<div class='q2'>I don’t know any other Rock.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_9">9&#160;</span>Everyone who makes a carved image is vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>The things that they delight in will not profit. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their own witnesses don’t see, nor know, that they may be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_10">10&#160;</span>Who has fashioned a god, </div>
<div class='q2'>or molds an image that is profitable for nothing? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, all his fellows will be disappointed; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the workmen are mere men. </div>
<div class='q'>Let them all be gathered together. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let them stand up. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will fear. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will be put to shame together. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_12">12&#160;</span>The blacksmith takes an ax, </div>
<div class='q2'>works in the coals, </div>
<div class='q2'>fashions it with hammers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and works it with his strong arm. </div>
<div class='q'>He is hungry, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his strength fails; </div>
<div class='q'>he drinks no water, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is faint. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_13">13&#160;</span>The carpenter stretches out a line. </div>
<div class='q2'>He marks it out with a pencil. </div>
<div class='q2'>He shapes it with planes. </div>
<div class='q2'>He marks it out with compasses, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shapes it like the figure of a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the beauty of a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>to reside in a house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_14">14&#160;</span>He cuts down cedars for himself, </div>
<div class='q2'>and takes the cypress and the oak, </div>
<div class='q2'>and strengthens for himself one among the trees of the forest. </div>
<div class='q'>He plants a cypress tree, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rain nourishes it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_15">15&#160;</span>Then it will be for a man to burn; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he takes some of it and warms himself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he burns it and bakes bread. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, he makes a god and worships it; </div>
<div class='q2'>he makes it a carved image, and falls down to it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_16">16&#160;</span>He burns part of it in the fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>With part of it, he eats meat. </div>
<div class='q2'>He roasts a roast and is satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, he warms himself </div>
<div class='q2'>and says, “Aha! I am warm. I have seen the fire.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_17">17&#160;</span>The rest of it he makes into a god, </div>
<div class='q2'>even his engraved image. </div>
<div class='q'>He bows down to it and worships, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prays to it, and says, “Deliver me, for you are my god!” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_18">18&#160;</span>They don’t know, neither do they consider, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has shut their eyes, that they can’t see, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their hearts, that they can’t understand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_19">19&#160;</span>No one thinks, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say, </div>
<div class='q2'>“I have burned part of it in the fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I have also baked bread on its coals. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have roasted meat and eaten it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall I make the rest of it into an abomination? </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall I bow down to a tree trunk?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_20">20&#160;</span>He feeds on ashes. </div>
<div class='q2'>A deceived heart has turned him aside; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he can’t deliver his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor say, “Isn’t there a lie in my right hand?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_21">21&#160;</span>Remember these things, Jacob and Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you are my servant. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have formed you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are my servant. </div>
<div class='q2'>Israel, you will not be forgotten by me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_22">22&#160;</span>I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, your transgressions, </div>
<div class='q2'>and, as a cloud, your sins. </div>
<div class='q2'>Return to me, for I have redeemed you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_23">23&#160;</span>Sing, you heavens, for Yahweh has done it! </div>
<div class='q2'>Shout, you lower parts of the earth! </div>
<div class='q2'>Break out into singing, you mountains, O forest, all of your trees, </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has redeemed Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will glorify himself in Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh, your Redeemer, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who formed you from the womb says: </div>
<div class='q'>“I am Yahweh, who makes all things; </div>
<div class='q2'>who alone stretches out the heavens; </div>
<div class='q2'>who spreads out the earth by myself; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_25">25&#160;</span>who frustrates the signs of the liars, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes diviners mad; </div>
<div class='q'>who turns wise men backward, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes their knowledge foolish; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_26">26&#160;</span>who confirms the word of his servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and performs the counsel of his messengers; </div>
<div class='q'>who says of Jerusalem, ‘She will be inhabited;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and of the cities of Judah, ‘They will be built,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and ‘I will raise up its waste places;’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_27">27&#160;</span>who says to the deep, ‘Be dry,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and ‘I will dry up your rivers,’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS44_28">28&#160;</span>who says of Cyrus, ‘He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>even saying of Jerusalem, ‘She will be built;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and of the temple, ‘Your foundation will be laid.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS45_0'>45</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh says to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have held to subdue nations before him and strip kings of their armor, to open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_2">2&#160;</span>“I will go before you </div>
<div class='q2'>and make the rough places smooth. </div>
<div class='q'>I will break the doors of bronze in pieces </div>
<div class='q2'>and cut apart the bars of iron. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_3">3&#160;</span>I will give you the treasures of darkness </div>
<div class='q2'>and hidden riches of secret places, </div>
<div class='q'>that you may know that it is I, Yahweh, who calls you by your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the God of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_4">4&#160;</span>For Jacob my servant’s sake, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel my chosen, </div>
<div class='q'>I have called you by your name. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have given you a title, </div>
<div class='q2'>though you have not known me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_5">5&#160;</span>I am Yahweh, and there is no one else. </div>
<div class='q2'>Besides me, there is no God. </div>
<div class='q'>I will strengthen<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> you, </div>
<div class='q2'>though you have not known me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_6">6&#160;</span>that they may know from the rising of the sun, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from the west, </div>
<div class='q'>that there is no one besides me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am Yahweh, and there is no one else. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_7">7&#160;</span>I form the light </div>
<div class='q2'>and create darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>I make peace </div>
<div class='q2'>and create calamity. </div>
<div class='q'>I am Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>who does all these things. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_8">8&#160;</span>Rain, you heavens, from above, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let the skies pour down righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>Let the earth open, that it may produce salvation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let it cause righteousness to spring up with it. </div>
<div class='q'>I, Yahweh, have created it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_9">9&#160;</span>Woe to him who strives with his Maker— </div>
<div class='q2'>a clay pot among the clay pots of the earth! </div>
<div class='q'>Shall the clay ask him who fashions it, ‘What are you making?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or your work, ‘He has no hands?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_10">10&#160;</span>Woe to him who says to a father, ‘What have you become the father of?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or to a mother, ‘What have you given birth to?’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_11">11&#160;</span>Yahweh, the Holy One of Israel </div>
<div class='q2'>and his Maker says: </div>
<div class='q'>“You ask me about the things that are to come, concerning my sons, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you command me concerning the work of my hands! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_12">12&#160;</span>I have made the earth, and created man on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have commanded all their army. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_13">13&#160;</span>I have raised him up in righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will make all his ways straight. </div>
<div class='q'>He shall build my city, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he shall let my exiles go free, </div>
<div class='q2'>not for price nor reward,” says Yahweh of Armies. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh says: “The labor of Egypt, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the merchandise of Ethiopia, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Sabeans, men of stature, will come over to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be yours. </div>
<div class='q'>They will go after you. </div>
<div class='q2'>They shall come over in chains. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will bow down to you. </div>
<div class='q'>They will make supplication to you: </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Surely God is in you; and there is no one else. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no other god. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_15">15&#160;</span>Most certainly you are a God who has hidden yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>God of Israel, the Savior.’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_16">16&#160;</span>They will be disappointed, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, confounded, all of them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who are makers of idols will go into confusion together. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_17">17&#160;</span>Israel will be saved by Yahweh with an everlasting salvation. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will not be disappointed nor confounded to ages everlasting. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_18">18&#160;</span>For Yahweh who created the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>the God who formed the earth and made it, </div>
<div class='q2'>who established it and didn’t create it a waste, </div>
<div class='q2'>who formed it to be inhabited says: </div>
<div class='q'>“I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no other. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_19">19&#160;</span>I have not spoken in secret, </div>
<div class='q2'>in a place of the land of darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>I didn’t say to the offspring of Jacob, ‘Seek me in vain.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>I, Yahweh, speak righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>I declare things that are right. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_20">20&#160;</span>“Assemble yourselves and come. </div>
<div class='q2'>Draw near together, you who have escaped from the nations. </div>
<div class='q'>Those have no knowledge who carry the wood of their engraved image, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pray to a god that can’t save. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_21">21&#160;</span>Declare and present it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, let them take counsel together. </div>
<div class='q'>Who has shown this from ancient time? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has declared it of old? </div>
<div class='q2'>Haven’t I, Yahweh? </div>
<div class='q'>There is no other God besides me, a just God and a Savior. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no one besides me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_22">22&#160;</span>“Look to me, and be saved, all the ends of the earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am God, and there is no other. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_23">23&#160;</span>I have sworn by myself. </div>
<div class='q2'>The word has gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and will not be revoked, </div>
<div class='q'>that to me every knee shall bow, </div>
<div class='q2'>every tongue shall take an oath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_24">24&#160;</span>They will say of me, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘There is righteousness and strength only in Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>Even to him will men come. </div>
<div class='q2'>All those who raged against him will be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS45_25">25&#160;</span>All the offspring of Israel will be justified in Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will rejoice!  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS46_0'> 46</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_1">1&#160;</span>Bel bows down. </div>
<div class='q2'>Nebo stoops. </div>
<div class='q'>Their idols are carried by animals, </div>
<div class='q2'>and on the livestock. </div>
<div class='q'>The things that you carried around are heavy loads, </div>
<div class='q2'>a burden for the weary. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_2">2&#160;</span>They stoop and they bow down together. </div>
<div class='q2'>They could not deliver the burden, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they have gone into captivity. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_3">3&#160;</span>“Listen to me, house of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the remnant of the house of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>that have been carried from their birth, </div>
<div class='q2'>that have been carried from the womb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_4">4&#160;</span>Even to old age I am he, </div>
<div class='q2'>and even to gray hairs I will carry you. </div>
<div class='q'>I have made, and I will bear. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I will carry, and will deliver. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_5">5&#160;</span>“To whom will you compare me, and consider my equal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and compare me, as if we were the same? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_6">6&#160;</span>Some pour out gold from the bag, </div>
<div class='q2'>and weigh silver in the balance. </div>
<div class='q'>They hire a goldsmith, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he makes it a god. </div>
<div class='q'>They fall down— </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, they worship. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_7">7&#160;</span>They bear it on their shoulder. </div>
<div class='q2'>They carry it, and set it in its place, and it stands there. </div>
<div class='q2'>It cannot move from its place. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, one may cry to it, yet it can not answer. </div>
<div class='q2'>It cannot save him out of his trouble. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_8">8&#160;</span>“Remember this, and show yourselves men. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bring it to mind again, you transgressors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_9">9&#160;</span>Remember the former things of old; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am God, and there is no other. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am God, and there is none like me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_10">10&#160;</span>I declare the end from the beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and from ancient times things that are not yet done. </div>
<div class='q'>I say: My counsel will stand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will do all that I please. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_11">11&#160;</span>I call a ravenous bird from the east, </div>
<div class='q2'>the man of my counsel from a far country. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, I have spoken. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will also bring it to pass. </div>
<div class='q'>I have planned. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will also do it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_12">12&#160;</span>Listen to me, you stubborn-hearted, </div>
<div class='q2'>who are far from righteousness! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS46_13">13&#160;</span>I bring my righteousness near. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is not far off, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my salvation will not wait. </div>
<div class='q'>I will grant salvation to Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>my glory to Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS47_0'>47</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_1">1&#160;</span>“Come down and sit in the dust, virgin daughter of Babylon. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sit on the ground without a throne, daughter of the Chaldeans. </div>
<div class='q2'>For you will no longer be called tender and delicate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_2">2&#160;</span>Take the millstones and grind flour. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remove your veil, lift up your skirt, uncover your legs, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wade through the rivers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_3">3&#160;</span>Your nakedness will be uncovered. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, your shame will be seen. </div>
<div class='q'>I will take vengeance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will spare no one.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_4">4&#160;</span>Our Redeemer, Yahweh of Armies is his name, </div>
<div class='q2'>is the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_5">5&#160;</span>“Sit in silence, and go into darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>daughter of the Chaldeans. </div>
<div class='q'>For you shall no longer be called </div>
<div class='q2'>the mistress of kingdoms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_6">6&#160;</span>I was angry with my people. </div>
<div class='q2'>I profaned my inheritance </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave them into your hand. </div>
<div class='q'>You showed them no mercy. </div>
<div class='q2'>You laid a very heavy yoke on the aged. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_7">7&#160;</span>You said, ‘I will be a princess forever,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>so that you didn’t lay these things to your heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor did you remember the results. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_8">8&#160;</span>“Now therefore hear this, you who are given to pleasures, </div>
<div class='q2'>who sit securely, </div>
<div class='q'>who say in your heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘I am, and there is no one else besides me. </div>
<div class='q'>I won’t sit as a widow, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will I know the loss of children.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_9">9&#160;</span>But these two things will come to you in a moment in one day: </div>
<div class='q2'>the loss of children and widowhood. </div>
<div class='q'>They will come on you in their full measure, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the multitude of your sorceries, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the great abundance of your enchantments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_10">10&#160;</span>For you have trusted in your wickedness. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have said, ‘No one sees me.’ </div>
<div class='q'>Your wisdom and your knowledge has perverted you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have said in your heart, ‘I am, and there is no one else besides me.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore disaster will come on you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You won’t know when it dawns. </div>
<div class='q'>Mischief will fall on you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You won’t be able to put it away. </div>
<div class='q'>Desolation will come on you suddenly, </div>
<div class='q2'>which you don’t understand. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_12">12&#160;</span>“Stand now with your enchantments </div>
<div class='q2'>and with the multitude of your sorceries, </div>
<div class='q2'>in which you have labored from your youth, </div>
<div class='q'>as if you might profit, </div>
<div class='q2'>as if you might prevail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_13">13&#160;</span>You are wearied in the multitude of your counsels. </div>
<div class='q2'>Now let the astrologers, the stargazers, and the monthly prognosticators stand up and save you from the things that will happen to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, they are like stubble. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fire will burn them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t deliver themselves from the power of the flame. </div>
<div class='q'>It won’t be a coal to warm at </div>
<div class='q2'>or a fire to sit by. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS47_15">15&#160;</span>The things that you labored in will be like this: </div>
<div class='q2'>those who have trafficked with you from your youth will each wander in his own way. </div>
<div class='q2'>There will be no one to save you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS48_0'> 48</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_1">1&#160;</span>“Hear this, house of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who are called by the name of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have come out of the waters of Judah. </div>
<div class='q'>You swear by Yahweh’s name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make mention of the God of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>but not in truth, nor in righteousness— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_2">2&#160;</span>for they call themselves citizens of the holy city, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rely on the God of Israel; </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_3">3&#160;</span>I have declared the former things from of old. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, they went out of my mouth, and I revealed them. </div>
<div class='q2'>I did them suddenly, and they happened. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_4">4&#160;</span>Because I knew that you are obstinate, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your neck is an iron sinew, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your brow bronze; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_5">5&#160;</span>therefore I have declared it to you from of old; </div>
<div class='q2'>before it came to pass I showed it to you; </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you should say, ‘My idol has done them. </div>
<div class='q2'>My engraved image and my molten image has commanded them.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_6">6&#160;</span>You have heard it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Now see all this. </div>
<div class='q2'>And you, won’t you declare it? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“I have shown you new things from this time, </div>
<div class='q2'>even hidden things, which you have not known. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_7">7&#160;</span>They are created now, and not from of old. </div>
<div class='q2'>Before today, you didn’t hear them, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you should say, ‘Behold, I knew them.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_8">8&#160;</span>Yes, you didn’t hear. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, you didn’t know. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, from of old your ear was not opened, </div>
<div class='q'>for I knew that you dealt very treacherously, </div>
<div class='q2'>and were called a transgressor from the womb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_9">9&#160;</span>For my name’s sake, I will defer my anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for my praise, I hold it back for you </div>
<div class='q2'>so that I don’t cut you off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, I have refined you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but not as silver. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have chosen you in the furnace of affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_11">11&#160;</span>For my own sake, </div>
<div class='q2'>for my own sake, I will do it; </div>
<div class='q'>for how would my name be profaned? </div>
<div class='q2'>I will not give my glory to another. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_12">12&#160;</span>“Listen to me, O Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel my called: </div>
<div class='q'>I am he. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am the first. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am also the last. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_13">13&#160;</span>Yes, my hand has laid the foundation of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my right hand has spread out the heavens. </div>
<div class='q2'>when I call to them, they stand up together. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_14">14&#160;</span>“Assemble yourselves, all of you, and hear! </div>
<div class='q2'>Who among them has declared these things? </div>
<div class='q'>He whom Yahweh loves will do what he likes to Babylon, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his arm will be against the Chaldeans. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_15">15&#160;</span>I, even I, have spoken. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I have called him. </div>
<div class='q'>I have brought him </div>
<div class='q2'>and he shall make his way prosperous. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_16">16&#160;</span>“Come near to me and hear this: </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“From the beginning I have not spoken in secret; </div>
<div class='q2'>from the time that it happened, I was there.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>Now the Lord Yahweh has sent me </div>
<div class='q2'>with his Spirit. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>your Redeemer, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Holy One of Israel, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“I am Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>who teaches you to profit, </div>
<div class='q2'>who leads you by the way that you should go. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_18">18&#160;</span>Oh that you had listened to my commandments! </div>
<div class='q2'>Then your peace would have been like a river </div>
<div class='q2'>and your righteousness like the waves of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_19">19&#160;</span>Your offspring also would have been as the sand </div>
<div class='q2'>and the descendants of your body like its grains. </div>
<div class='q2'>His name would not be cut off nor destroyed from before me.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_20">20&#160;</span>Leave Babylon! </div>
<div class='q2'>Flee from the Chaldeans! </div>
<div class='q'>With a voice of singing announce this, </div>
<div class='q2'>tell it even to the end of the earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>say, “Yahweh has redeemed his servant Jacob!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_21">21&#160;</span>They didn’t thirst when he led them through the deserts. </div>
<div class='q2'>He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He also split the rock and the waters gushed out. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS48_22">22&#160;</span>“There is no peace”, says Yahweh, “for the wicked.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS49_0'> 49</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_1">1&#160;</span>Listen, islands, to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Listen, you peoples, from afar: </div>
<div class='q'>Yahweh has called me from the womb; </div>
<div class='q2'>from the inside of my mother, he has mentioned my name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_2">2&#160;</span>He has made my mouth like a sharp sword. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has hidden me in the shadow of his hand. </div>
<div class='q'>He has made me a polished shaft. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has kept me close in his quiver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_3">3&#160;</span>He said to me, “You are my servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>Israel, in whom I will be glorified.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_4">4&#160;</span>But I said, “I have labored in vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have spent my strength in vain for nothing; </div>
<div class='q'>yet surely the justice due to me is with Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my reward with my God.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_5">5&#160;</span>Now Yahweh, he who formed me from the womb to be his servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>says to bring Jacob again to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to gather Israel to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am honorable in Yahweh’s eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my God has become my strength. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_6">6&#160;</span>Indeed, he says, “It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to restore the preserved of Israel. </div>
<div class='q'>I will also give you as a light to the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be my salvation to the end of the earth.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, </div>
<div class='q2'>says to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant of rulers: </div>
<div class='q'>“Kings shall see and rise up, </div>
<div class='q2'>princes, and they shall worship, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of Yahweh who is faithful, even the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “I have answered you in an acceptable time. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have helped you in a day of salvation. </div>
<div class='q'>I will preserve you and give you for a covenant of the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>to raise up the land, to make them inherit the desolate heritage, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_9">9&#160;</span>saying to those who are bound, ‘Come out!’; </div>
<div class='q2'>to those who are in darkness, ‘Show yourselves!’ </div>
<div class='q'>“They shall feed along the paths, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their pasture shall be on all treeless heights. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_10">10&#160;</span>They shall not hunger nor thirst; </div>
<div class='q2'>neither shall the heat nor sun strike them, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he who has mercy on them will lead them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will guide them by springs of water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_11">11&#160;</span>I will make all my mountains a road, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my highways shall be exalted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_12">12&#160;</span>Behold, these shall come from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and behold, these from the north and from the west, </div>
<div class='q2'>and these from the land of Sinim.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_13">13&#160;</span>Sing, heavens, and be joyful, earth! </div>
<div class='q2'>Break out into singing, mountains! </div>
<div class='q'>For Yahweh has comforted his people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will have compassion on his afflicted. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_14">14&#160;</span>But Zion said, “Yahweh has forsaken me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Lord has forgotten me.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_15">15&#160;</span>“Can a woman forget her nursing child, </div>
<div class='q2'>that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, these may forget, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet I will not forget you! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_16">16&#160;</span>Behold, I have engraved you on the palms of my hands. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your walls are continually before me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_17">17&#160;</span>Your children hurry. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your destroyers and those who devastated you will leave you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_18">18&#160;</span>Lift up your eyes all around, and see: </div>
<div class='q2'>all these gather themselves together, and come to you. </div>
<div class='q'>As I live,” says Yahweh, “you shall surely clothe yourself with them all as with an ornament, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dress yourself with them, like a bride. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_19">19&#160;</span>“For, as for your waste and your desolate places, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your land that has been destroyed, </div>
<div class='q'>surely now that land will be too small for the inhabitants, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who swallowed you up will be far away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_20">20&#160;</span>The children of your bereavement will say in your ears, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘This place is too small for me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give me a place to live in.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_21">21&#160;</span>Then you will say in your heart, ‘Who has conceived these for me, since I have been bereaved of my children </div>
<div class='q2'>and am alone, an exile, and wandering back and forth? </div>
<div class='q'>Who has brought these up? </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, I was left alone. Where were these?’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_22">22&#160;</span>The Lord Yahweh says, “Behold, I will lift up my hand to the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lift up my banner to the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>They shall bring your sons in their bosom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your daughters shall be carried on their shoulders. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_23">23&#160;</span>Kings shall be your foster fathers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their queens your nursing mothers. </div>
<div class='q'>They will bow down to you with their faces to the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lick the dust of your feet. </div>
<div class='q'>Then you will know that I am Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who wait for me won’t be disappointed.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_24">24&#160;</span>Shall the plunder be taken from the mighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the lawful captives be delivered? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_25">25&#160;</span>But Yahweh says, “Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the plunder retrieved from the fierce, </div>
<div class='q'>for I will contend with him who contends with you </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will save your children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS49_26">26&#160;</span>I will feed those who oppress you with their own flesh; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will be drunk on their own blood, as with sweet wine. </div>
<div class='q'>Then all flesh shall know that I, Yahweh, am your Savior </div>
<div class='q2'>and your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS50_0'> 50</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh says, “Where is the bill of your mother’s divorce, with which I have put her away? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or to which of my creditors have I sold you? </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, you were sold for your iniquities, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your mother was put away for your transgressions. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_2">2&#160;</span>Why, when I came, was there no one? </div>
<div class='q2'>When I called, why was there no one to answer? </div>
<div class='q'>Is my hand shortened at all, that it can’t redeem? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or have I no power to deliver? </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. </div>
<div class='q2'>I make the rivers a wilderness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their fish stink because there is no water, and die of thirst. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_3">3&#160;</span>I clothe the heavens with blackness. </div>
<div class='q2'>I make sackcloth their covering.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_4">4&#160;</span>The Lord Yahweh has given me the tongue of those who are taught, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I may know how to sustain with words him who is weary. </div>
<div class='q'>He awakens morning by morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>he awakens my ear to hear as those who are taught. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_5">5&#160;</span>The Lord Yahweh has opened my ear. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was not rebellious. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have not turned back. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_6">6&#160;</span>I gave my back to those who beat me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my cheeks to those who plucked off the hair. </div>
<div class='q2'>I didn’t hide my face from shame and spitting. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_7">7&#160;</span>For the Lord Yahweh will help me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I have not been confounded. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore I have set my face like a flint, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I know that I won’t be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_8">8&#160;</span>He who justifies me is near. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will bring charges against me? </div>
<div class='q'>Let us stand up together. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is my adversary? </div>
<div class='q2'>Let him come near to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, the Lord Yahweh will help me! </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is he who will condemn me? </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, they will all grow old like a garment. </div>
<div class='q2'>The moths will eat them up. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_10">10&#160;</span>Who among you fears Yahweh </div>
<div class='q2'>and obeys the voice of his servant? </div>
<div class='q'>He who walks in darkness </div>
<div class='q2'>and has no light, </div>
<div class='q'>let him trust in Yahweh’s name, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rely on his God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS50_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, all you who kindle a fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>who adorn yourselves with torches around yourselves, </div>
<div class='q'>walk in the flame of your fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>and among the torches that you have kindled. </div>
<div class='q'>You will have this from my hand: </div>
<div class='q2'>you will lie down in sorrow.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS51_0'> 51</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_1">1&#160;</span>“Listen to me, you who follow after righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who seek Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>Look to the rock you were cut from, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the quarry you were dug from. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_2">2&#160;</span>Look to Abraham your father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to Sarah who bore you; </div>
<div class='q'>for when he was but one I called him, </div>
<div class='q2'>I blessed him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made him many. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_3">3&#160;</span>For Yahweh has comforted Zion. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has comforted all her waste places, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has made her wilderness like Eden, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her desert like the garden of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>Joy and gladness will be found in them, </div>
<div class='q2'>thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_4">4&#160;</span>“Listen to me, my people; </div>
<div class='q2'>and hear me, my nation, </div>
<div class='q'>for a law will go out from me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will establish my justice for a light to the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_5">5&#160;</span>My righteousness is near. </div>
<div class='q2'>My salvation has gone out, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my arms will judge the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>The islands will wait for me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will trust my arm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_6">6&#160;</span>Lift up your eyes to the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and look at the earth beneath; </div>
<div class='q'>for the heavens will vanish away like smoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the earth will wear out like a garment. </div>
<div class='q'>Its inhabitants will die in the same way, </div>
<div class='q2'>but my salvation will be forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my righteousness will not be abolished. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_7">7&#160;</span>“Listen to me, you who know righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>the people in whose heart is my law. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t fear the reproach of men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t be dismayed at their insults. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_8">8&#160;</span>For the moth will eat them up like a garment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the worm will eat them like wool; </div>
<div class='q'>but my righteousness will be forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my salvation to all generations.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_9">9&#160;</span>Awake, awake, put on strength, arm of Yahweh! </div>
<div class='q2'>Awake, as in the days of old, </div>
<div class='q2'>the generations of ancient times. </div>
<div class='q'>Isn’t it you who cut Rahab in pieces, </div>
<div class='q2'>who pierced the monster? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_10">10&#160;</span>Isn’t it you who dried up the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>the waters of the great deep; </div>
<div class='q2'>who made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_11">11&#160;</span>Those ransomed by Yahweh will return, </div>
<div class='q2'>and come with singing to Zion. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everlasting joy shall be on their heads. </div>
<div class='q'>They will obtain gladness and joy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sorrow and sighing shall flee away. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_12">12&#160;</span>“I, even I, am he who comforts you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who are you, that you are afraid of man who shall die, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of the son of man who will be made as grass? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_13">13&#160;</span>Have you forgotten Yahweh your Maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>who stretched out the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and laid the foundations of the earth? </div>
<div class='q'>Do you live in fear continually all day because of the fury of the oppressor, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he prepares to destroy? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is the fury of the oppressor? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_14">14&#160;</span>The captive exile will speedily be freed. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will not die and go down into the pit. </div>
<div class='q2'>His bread won’t fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_15">15&#160;</span>For I am Yahweh your God, who stirs up the sea </div>
<div class='q2'>so that its waves roar. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_16">16&#160;</span>I have put my words in your mouth </div>
<div class='q2'>and have covered you in the shadow of my hand, </div>
<div class='q'>that I may plant the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lay the foundations of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and tell Zion, ‘You are my people.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_17">17&#160;</span>Awake, awake! </div>
<div class='q2'>Stand up, Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who have drunk from Yahweh’s hand the cup of his wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>You have drunken the bowl of the cup of staggering, </div>
<div class='q2'>and drained it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_18">18&#160;</span>There is no one to guide her among all the sons to whom she has given birth; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no one who takes her by the hand among all the sons whom she has brought up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_19">19&#160;</span>These two things have happened to you— </div>
<div class='q2'>who will grieve with you?— </div>
<div class='q'>desolation and destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and famine and the sword. </div>
<div class='q2'>How can I comfort you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_20">20&#160;</span>Your sons have fainted. </div>
<div class='q2'>They lie at the head of all the streets, </div>
<div class='q2'>like an antelope in a net. </div>
<div class='q'>They are full of Yahweh’s wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>the rebuke of your God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_21">21&#160;</span>Therefore now hear this, you afflicted, </div>
<div class='q2'>and drunken, but not with wine: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_22">22&#160;</span>Your Lord Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>your God who pleads the cause of his people, says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, I have taken out of your hand the cup of staggering, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the bowl of the cup of my wrath. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will not drink it any more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS51_23">23&#160;</span>I will put it into the hand of those who afflict you, </div>
<div class='q2'>who have said to your soul, ‘Bow down, that we may walk over you;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and you have laid your back as the ground, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a street to those who walk over.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS52_0'> 52</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_1">1&#160;</span>Awake, awake! Put on your strength, Zion. </div>
<div class='q2'>Put on your beautiful garments, Jerusalem, the holy city, </div>
<div class='q2'>for from now on the uncircumcised and the unclean will no more come into you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_2">2&#160;</span>Shake yourself from the dust! </div>
<div class='q2'>Arise, sit up, Jerusalem! </div>
<div class='q2'>Release yourself from the bonds of your neck, captive daughter of Zion! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_3">3&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “You were sold for nothing; </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will be redeemed without money.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_4">4&#160;</span>For the Lord Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“My people went down at the first into Egypt to live there; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Assyrian has oppressed them without cause. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_5">5&#160;</span>“Now therefore, what do I do here,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“seeing that my people are taken away for nothing? </div>
<div class='q'>Those who rule over them mock,” says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“and my name is blasphemed continually all day long. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore my people shall know my name. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore they shall know in that day that I am he who speaks. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, it is I.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_7">7&#160;</span>How beautiful on the mountains are the feet of him who brings good news, </div>
<div class='q2'>who publishes peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>who brings good news, </div>
<div class='q2'>who proclaims salvation, </div>
<div class='q2'>who says to Zion, “Your God reigns!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_8">8&#160;</span>Your watchmen lift up their voice. </div>
<div class='q2'>Together they sing; </div>
<div class='q2'>for they shall see eye to eye when Yahweh returns to Zion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_9">9&#160;</span>Break out into joy! </div>
<div class='q2'>Sing together, you waste places of Jerusalem; </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh has comforted his people. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has redeemed Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh has made his holy arm bare in the eyes of all the nations. </div>
<div class='q2'>All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_11">11&#160;</span>Depart! Depart! Go out from there! Touch no unclean thing! </div>
<div class='q2'>Go out from among her! </div>
<div class='q2'>Cleanse yourselves, you who carry Yahweh’s vessels. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_12">12&#160;</span>For you shall not go out in haste, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither shall you go by flight; </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh will go before you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the God of Israel will be your rear guard. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_13">13&#160;</span>Behold, my servant will deal wisely. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be exalted and lifted up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be very high. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_14">14&#160;</span>Just as many were astonished at you— </div>
<div class='q2'>his appearance was marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS52_15">15&#160;</span>so he will cleanse<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> many nations. </div>
<div class='q2'>Kings will shut their mouths at him; </div>
<div class='q2'>for they will see that which had not been told them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they will understand that which they had not heard.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS53_0'> 53</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_1">1&#160;</span>Who has believed our message? </div>
<div class='q2'>To whom has Yahweh’s arm been revealed? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_2">2&#160;</span>For he grew up before him as a tender plant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a root out of dry ground. </div>
<div class='q'>He has no good looks or majesty. </div>
<div class='q2'>When we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_3">3&#160;</span>He was despised </div>
<div class='q2'>and rejected by men, </div>
<div class='q'>a man of suffering </div>
<div class='q2'>and acquainted with disease. </div>
<div class='q'>He was despised as one from whom men hide their face; </div>
<div class='q2'>and we didn’t respect him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_4">4&#160;</span>Surely he has borne our sickness </div>
<div class='q2'>and carried our suffering; </div>
<div class='q'>yet we considered him plagued, </div>
<div class='q2'>struck by God, and afflicted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_5">5&#160;</span>But he was pierced for our transgressions. </div>
<div class='q2'>He was crushed for our iniquities. </div>
<div class='q'>The punishment that brought our peace was on him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and by his wounds we are healed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_6">6&#160;</span>All we like sheep have gone astray. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everyone has turned to his own way; </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh has laid on him the iniquity of us all. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_7">7&#160;</span>He was oppressed, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet when he was afflicted he didn’t open his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a sheep that before its shearers is silent, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he didn’t open his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_8">8&#160;</span>He was taken away by oppression and judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>As for his generation, </div>
<div class='q2'>who considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living </div>
<div class='q2'>and stricken for the disobedience of my people? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_9">9&#160;</span>They made his grave with the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with a rich man in his death, </div>
<div class='q'>although he had done no violence, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor was any deceit in his mouth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_10">10&#160;</span>Yet it pleased Yahweh to bruise him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has caused him to suffer. </div>
<div class='q'>When you make his soul an offering for sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will see his offspring. </div>
<div class='q'>He will prolong his days </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh’s pleasure will prosper in his hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_11">11&#160;</span>After the suffering of his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will see the light<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and be satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>My righteous servant will justify many by the knowledge of himself; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will bear their iniquities. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS53_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore I will give him a portion with the great. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will divide the plunder with the strong, </div>
<div class='q'>because he poured out his soul to death </div>
<div class='q2'>and was counted with the transgressors; </div>
<div class='q'>yet he bore the sins of many </div>
<div class='q2'>and made intercession for the transgressors.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS54_0'> 54</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_1">1&#160;</span>“Sing, barren, you who didn’t give birth! </div>
<div class='q2'>Break out into singing, and cry aloud, you who didn’t travail with child! </div>
<div class='q2'>For more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married wife,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_2">2&#160;</span>“Enlarge the place of your tent, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let them stretch out the curtains of your habitations; </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t spare; lengthen your cords, and strengthen your stakes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_3">3&#160;</span>For you will spread out on the right hand and on the left; </div>
<div class='q2'>and your offspring will possess the nations </div>
<div class='q2'>and settle in desolate cities. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_4">4&#160;</span>“Don’t be afraid, for you will not be ashamed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t be confounded, for you will not be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>For you will forget the shame of your youth. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will remember the reproach of your widowhood no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_5">5&#160;</span>For your Maker is your husband; Yahweh of Armies is his name. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Holy One of Israel is your Redeemer. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be called the God of the whole earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_6">6&#160;</span>For Yahweh has called you as a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit, </div>
<div class='q2'>even a wife of youth, when she is cast off,” says your God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_7">7&#160;</span>“For a small moment I have forsaken you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but I will gather you with great mercies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_8">8&#160;</span>In overflowing wrath I hid my face from you for a moment, </div>
<div class='q2'>but with everlasting loving kindness I will have mercy on you,” says Yahweh your Redeemer. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_9">9&#160;</span>“For this is like the waters of Noah to me; </div>
<div class='q2'>for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah will no more go over the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>so I have sworn that I will not be angry with you, nor rebuke you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_10">10&#160;</span>For the mountains may depart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the hills be removed, </div>
<div class='q'>but my loving kindness will not depart from you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my covenant of peace will not be removed,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh who has mercy on you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_11">11&#160;</span>“You afflicted, tossed with storms, and not comforted, </div>
<div class='q2'>behold, I will set your stones in beautiful colors, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lay your foundations with sapphires. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_12">12&#160;</span>I will make your pinnacles of rubies, </div>
<div class='q2'>your gates of sparkling jewels, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all your walls of precious stones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_13">13&#160;</span>All your children will be taught by Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your children’s peace will be great. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_14">14&#160;</span>You will be established in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will be far from oppression, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you will not be afraid, </div>
<div class='q2'>and far from terror, </div>
<div class='q2'>for it shall not come near you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, they may gather together, but not by me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever gathers together against you will fall because of you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_16">16&#160;</span>“Behold, I have created the blacksmith who fans the coals into flame, </div>
<div class='q2'>and forges a weapon for his work; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have created the destroyer to destroy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS54_17">17&#160;</span>No weapon that is formed against you will prevail; </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will condemn every tongue that rises against you in judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>This is the heritage of Yahweh’s servants, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their righteousness is of me,” says Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS55_0'> 55</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_1">1&#160;</span>“Hey! Come, everyone who thirsts, to the waters! </div>
<div class='q2'>Come, he who has no money, buy, and eat! </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_2">2&#160;</span>Why do you spend money for that which is not bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your labor for that which doesn’t satisfy? </div>
<div class='q'>Listen diligently to me, and eat that which is good, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let your soul delight itself in richness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_3">3&#160;</span>Turn your ear, and come to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hear, and your soul will live. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_4">4&#160;</span>Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples, </div>
<div class='q2'>a leader and commander to the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, you shall call a nation that you don’t know; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a nation that didn’t know you shall run to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for the Holy One of Israel; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he has glorified you.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_6">6&#160;</span>Seek Yahweh while he may be found. </div>
<div class='q2'>Call on him while he is near. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_7">7&#160;</span>Let the wicked forsake his way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the unrighteous man his thoughts. </div>
<div class='q'>Let him return to Yahweh, and he will have mercy on him, </div>
<div class='q2'>to our God, for he will freely pardon. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_8">8&#160;</span>“For my thoughts are not your thoughts, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your ways are not my ways,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_9">9&#160;</span>“For as the heavens are higher than the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>so are my ways higher than your ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my thoughts than your thoughts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_10">10&#160;</span>For as the rain comes down and the snow from the sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t return there, but waters the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes it grow and bud, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_11">11&#160;</span>so is my word that goes out of my mouth: </div>
<div class='q2'>it will not return to me void, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it will accomplish that which I please, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it will prosper in the thing I sent it to do. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_12">12&#160;</span>For you shall go out with joy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be led out with peace. </div>
<div class='q'>The mountains and the hills will break out before you into singing; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the trees of the fields will clap their hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS55_13">13&#160;</span>Instead of the thorn the cypress tree will come up; </div>
<div class='q2'>and instead of the brier the myrtle tree will come up. </div>
<div class='q'>It will make a name for Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>for an everlasting sign that will not be cut off.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS56_0'>56</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Maintain justice </div>
<div class='q2'>and do what is right, </div>
<div class='q'>for my salvation is near </div>
<div class='q2'>and my righteousness will soon be revealed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_2">2&#160;</span>Blessed is the man who does this, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the son of man who holds it fast; </div>
<div class='q'>who keeps the Sabbath without profaning it </div>
<div class='q2'>and keeps his hand from doing any evil.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_3">3&#160;</span>Let no foreigner who has joined himself to Yahweh speak, saying, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Yahweh will surely separate me from his people.” </div>
<div class='q2'>Do not let the eunuch say, “Behold, I am a dry tree.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_4">4&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “To the eunuchs who keep my Sabbaths, </div>
<div class='q2'>choose the things that please me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hold fast to my covenant, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_5">5&#160;</span>I will give them in my house and within my walls a memorial and a name better than of sons and of daughters. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will give them an everlasting name that will not be cut off. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_6">6&#160;</span>Also the foreigners who join themselves to Yahweh </div>
<div class='q2'>to serve him, </div>
<div class='q'>and to love Yahweh’s name, </div>
<div class='q2'>to be his servants, </div>
<div class='q'>everyone who keeps the Sabbath from profaning it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and holds fast my covenant, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_7">7&#160;</span>I will bring these to my holy mountain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make them joyful in my house of prayer. </div>
<div class='q'>Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices will be accepted on my altar; </div>
<div class='q2'>for my house will be called a house of prayer for all peoples.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_8">8&#160;</span>The Lord Yahweh, who gathers the outcasts of Israel, says, </div>
<div class='q2'>“I will yet gather others to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>in addition to his own who are gathered.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_9">9&#160;</span>All you animals of the field, </div>
<div class='q2'>come to devour, </div>
<div class='q2'>all you animals in the forest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_10">10&#160;</span>His watchmen are blind. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are all without knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>They are all mute dogs. </div>
<div class='q2'>They can’t bark— </div>
<div class='q2'>dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_11">11&#160;</span>Yes, the dogs are greedy. </div>
<div class='q2'>They can never have enough. </div>
<div class='q'>They are shepherds who can’t understand. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have all turned to their own way, </div>
<div class='q2'>each one to his gain, from every quarter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS56_12">12&#160;</span>“Come,” they say, “I will get wine, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; </div>
<div class='q2'>and tomorrow will be as today, </div>
<div class='q2'>great beyond measure.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS57_0'> 57</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_1">1&#160;</span>The righteous perish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one lays it to heart. </div>
<div class='q'>Merciful men are taken away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one considers that the righteous is taken away from the evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_2">2&#160;</span>He enters into peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>They rest in their beds, </div>
<div class='q2'>each one who walks in his uprightness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_3">3&#160;</span>“But draw near here, you sons of a sorceress, </div>
<div class='q2'>you offspring of adulterers and prostitutes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_4">4&#160;</span>Whom do you mock? </div>
<div class='q2'>Against whom do you make a wide mouth </div>
<div class='q2'>and stick out your tongue? </div>
<div class='q'>Aren’t you children of disobedience </div>
<div class='q2'>and offspring of falsehood, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_5">5&#160;</span>you who inflame yourselves among the oaks, </div>
<div class='q2'>under every green tree; </div>
<div class='q'>who kill the children in the valleys, </div>
<div class='q2'>under the clefts of the rocks? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_6">6&#160;</span>Among the smooth stones of the valley is your portion. </div>
<div class='q2'>They, they are your lot. </div>
<div class='q'>You have even poured a drink offering to them. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have offered an offering. </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall I be appeased for these things? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_7">7&#160;</span>On a high and lofty mountain you have set your bed. </div>
<div class='q2'>You also went up there to offer sacrifice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_8">8&#160;</span>You have set up your memorial behind the doors and the posts, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have exposed yourself to someone besides me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have gone up. </div>
<div class='q'>You have enlarged your bed </div>
<div class='q2'>and made you a covenant with them. </div>
<div class='q2'>You loved what you saw on their bed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_9">9&#160;</span>You went to the king with oil, </div>
<div class='q2'>increased your perfumes, </div>
<div class='q2'>sent your ambassadors far off, </div>
<div class='q2'>and degraded yourself even to Sheol.<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_10">10&#160;</span>You were wearied with the length of your ways; </div>
<div class='q2'>yet you didn’t say, ‘It is in vain.’ </div>
<div class='q'>You found a reviving of your strength; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore you weren’t faint. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_11">11&#160;</span>“Whom have you dreaded and feared, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that you lie, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have not remembered me, nor laid it to your heart? </div>
<div class='q'>Haven’t I held my peace for a long time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you don’t fear me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_12">12&#160;</span>I will declare your righteousness; </div>
<div class='q2'>and as for your works, they will not benefit you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_13">13&#160;</span>When you cry, </div>
<div class='q2'>let those whom you have gathered deliver you, </div>
<div class='q'>but the wind will take them. </div>
<div class='q2'>A breath will carry them all away, </div>
<div class='q'>but he who takes refuge in me will possess the land, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will inherit my holy mountain.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_14">14&#160;</span>He will say, “Build up, build up, prepare the way! </div>
<div class='q2'>Remove the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_15">15&#160;</span>For the high and lofty One who inhabits eternity, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose name is Holy, says: </div>
<div class='q'>“I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also who is of a contrite and humble spirit, </div>
<div class='q2'>to revive the spirit of the humble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to revive the heart of the contrite. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_16">16&#160;</span>For I will not contend forever, neither will I always be angry; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the spirit would faint before me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the souls whom I have made. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_17">17&#160;</span>I was angry because of the iniquity of his covetousness and struck him. </div>
<div class='q2'>I hid myself and was angry; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he went on backsliding in the way of his heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_18">18&#160;</span>I have seen his ways, and will heal him. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will lead him also, </div>
<div class='q2'>and restore comforts to him and to his mourners. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_19">19&#160;</span>I create the fruit of the lips: </div>
<div class='q2'>Peace, peace, to him who is far off and to him who is near,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh; “and I will heal them.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_20">20&#160;</span>But the wicked are like the troubled sea; </div>
<div class='q2'>for it can’t rest and its waters cast up mire and mud. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS57_21">21&#160;</span>“There is no peace”, says my God, </div>
<div class='q2'>“for the wicked.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS58_0'> 58</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_1">1&#160;</span>“Cry aloud! Don’t spare! </div>
<div class='q2'>Lift up your voice like a trumpet! </div>
<div class='q'>Declare to my people their disobedience, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the house of Jacob their sins. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_2">2&#160;</span>Yet they seek me daily, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delight to know my ways. </div>
<div class='q'>As a nation that did righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and didn’t forsake the ordinance of their God, </div>
<div class='q'>they ask of me righteous judgments. </div>
<div class='q2'>They delight to draw near to God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_3">3&#160;</span>‘Why have we fasted,’ they say, ‘and you don’t see? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why have we afflicted our soul, and you don’t notice?’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and oppress all your laborers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_4">4&#160;</span>Behold, you fast for strife and contention, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to strike with the fist of wickedness. </div>
<div class='q2'>You don’t fast today so as to make your voice to be heard on high. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_5">5&#160;</span>Is this the fast that I have chosen? </div>
<div class='q2'>A day for a man to humble his soul? </div>
<div class='q'>Is it to bow down his head like a reed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to spread sackcloth and ashes under himself? </div>
<div class='q'>Will you call this a fast, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an acceptable day to Yahweh? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_6">6&#160;</span>“Isn’t this the fast that I have chosen: </div>
<div class='q2'>to release the bonds of wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>to undo the straps of the yoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>to let the oppressed go free, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that you break every yoke? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_7">7&#160;</span>Isn’t it to distribute your bread to the hungry, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that you bring the poor who are cast out to your house? </div>
<div class='q'>When you see the naked, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you cover him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and that you not hide yourself from your own flesh? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_8">8&#160;</span>Then your light will break out as the morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your healing will appear quickly; </div>
<div class='q'>then your righteousness shall go before you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh’s glory will be your rear guard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_9">9&#160;</span>Then you will call, and Yahweh will answer. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will cry for help, and he will say, ‘Here I am.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“If you take away from among you the yoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>finger pointing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and speaking wickedly; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_10">10&#160;</span>and if you pour out your soul to the hungry, </div>
<div class='q2'>and satisfy the afflicted soul, </div>
<div class='q'>then your light will rise in darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your obscurity will be as the noonday; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_11">11&#160;</span>and Yahweh will guide you continually, </div>
<div class='q2'>satisfy your soul in dry places, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make your bones strong. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be like a watered garden, </div>
<div class='q2'>and like a spring of water </div>
<div class='q2'>whose waters don’t fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_12">12&#160;</span>Those who will be of you will build the old waste places. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will raise up the foundations of many generations. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be called Repairer of the Breach, </div>
<div class='q2'>Restorer of Paths with Dwellings. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_13">13&#160;</span>“If you turn away your foot from the Sabbath, </div>
<div class='q2'>from doing your pleasure on my holy day, </div>
<div class='q'>and call the Sabbath a delight, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the holy of Yahweh honorable, </div>
<div class='q2'>and honor it, </div>
<div class='q2'>not doing your own ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor finding your own pleasure, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor speaking your own words, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS58_14">14&#160;</span>then you will delight yourself in Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will make you to ride on the high places of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will feed you with the heritage of Jacob your father;” </div>
<div class='q2'>for Yahweh’s mouth has spoken it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS59_0'> 59</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_1">1&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh’s hand is not shortened, that it can’t save; </div>
<div class='q2'>nor his ear dull, that it can’t hear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_2">2&#160;</span>But your iniquities have separated you and your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your sins have hidden his face from you, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that he will not hear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_3">3&#160;</span>For your hands are defiled with blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your fingers with iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>Your lips have spoken lies. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your tongue mutters wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_4">4&#160;</span>No one sues in righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one pleads in truth. </div>
<div class='q'>They trust in vanity </div>
<div class='q2'>and speak lies. </div>
<div class='q'>They conceive mischief </div>
<div class='q2'>and give birth to iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_5">5&#160;</span>They hatch adders’ eggs </div>
<div class='q2'>and weave the spider’s web. </div>
<div class='q'>He who eats of their eggs dies; </div>
<div class='q2'>and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_6">6&#160;</span>Their webs won’t become garments. </div>
<div class='q2'>They won’t cover themselves with their works. </div>
<div class='q'>Their works are works of iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and acts of violence are in their hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_7">7&#160;</span>Their feet run to evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they hurry to shed innocent blood. </div>
<div class='q'>Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Desolation and destruction are in their paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_8">8&#160;</span>They don’t know the way of peace; </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no justice in their ways. </div>
<div class='q'>They have made crooked paths for themselves; </div>
<div class='q2'>whoever goes in them doesn’t know peace. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore justice is far from us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and righteousness doesn’t overtake us. </div>
<div class='q'>We look for light, but see darkness; </div>
<div class='q2'>for brightness, but we walk in obscurity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_10">10&#160;</span>We grope for the wall like the blind. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, we grope as those who have no eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>We stumble at noon as if it were twilight. </div>
<div class='q2'>Among those who are strong, we are like dead men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_11">11&#160;</span>We all roar like bears </div>
<div class='q2'>and moan sadly like doves. </div>
<div class='q'>We look for justice, but there is none, </div>
<div class='q2'>for salvation, but it is far off from us. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_12">12&#160;</span>For our transgressions are multiplied before you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and our sins testify against us; </div>
<div class='q'>for our transgressions are with us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as for our iniquities, we know them: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_13">13&#160;</span>transgressing and denying Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and turning away from following our God, </div>
<div class='q2'>speaking oppression and revolt, </div>
<div class='q2'>conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_14">14&#160;</span>Justice is turned away backward, </div>
<div class='q2'>and righteousness stands far away; </div>
<div class='q'>for truth has fallen in the street, </div>
<div class='q2'>and uprightness can’t enter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_15">15&#160;</span>Yes, truth is lacking; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who departs from evil makes himself a prey. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>Yahweh saw it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it displeased him that there was no justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_16">16&#160;</span>He saw that there was no man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wondered that there was no intercessor. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore his own arm brought salvation to him; </div>
<div class='q2'>and his righteousness sustained him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_17">17&#160;</span>He put on righteousness as a breastplate, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a helmet of salvation on his head. </div>
<div class='q'>He put on garments of vengeance for clothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was clad with zeal as a mantle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_18">18&#160;</span>According to their deeds, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will repay as appropriate: </div>
<div class='q2'>wrath to his adversaries, </div>
<div class='q2'>recompense to his enemies. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will repay the islands their due. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_19">19&#160;</span>So they will fear Yahweh’s name from the west, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his glory from the rising of the sun; </div>
<div class='q'>for he will come as a rushing stream, </div>
<div class='q2'>which Yahweh’s breath drives. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_20">20&#160;</span>“A Redeemer will come to Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to those who turn from disobedience in Jacob,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS59_21">21&#160;</span>“As for me, this is my covenant with them,” says Yahweh. “My Spirit who is on you, and my words which I have put in your mouth shall not depart out of your mouth, nor out of the mouth of your offspring, nor out of the mouth of your offspring’s offspring,” says Yahweh, “from now on and forever.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS60_0'> 60</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_1">1&#160;</span>“Arise, shine; for your light has come, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh’s glory has risen on you! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_2">2&#160;</span>For behold, darkness will cover the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and thick darkness the peoples; </div>
<div class='q'>but Yahweh will arise on you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his glory shall be seen on you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_3">3&#160;</span>Nations will come to your light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and kings to the brightness of your rising. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_4">4&#160;</span>“Lift up your eyes all around, and see: </div>
<div class='q2'>they all gather themselves together. </div>
<div class='q2'>They come to you. </div>
<div class='q'>Your sons will come from far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your daughters will be carried in arms. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_5">5&#160;</span>Then you shall see and be radiant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your heart will thrill and be enlarged; </div>
<div class='q'>because the abundance of the sea will be turned to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>The wealth of the nations will come to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_6">6&#160;</span>A multitude of camels will cover you, </div>
<div class='q2'>the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah. </div>
<div class='q'>All from Sheba will come. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will bring gold and frankincense, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will proclaim the praises of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_7">7&#160;</span>All the flocks of Kedar will be gathered together to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>The rams of Nebaioth will serve you. </div>
<div class='q'>They will be accepted as offerings on my altar; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will beautify my glorious house. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_8">8&#160;</span>“Who are these who fly as a cloud, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the doves to their windows? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_9">9&#160;</span>Surely the islands will wait for me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the ships of Tarshish first, </div>
<div class='q'>to bring your sons from far away, </div>
<div class='q2'>their silver and their gold with them, </div>
<div class='q'>for the name of Yahweh your God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for the Holy One of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he has glorified you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_10">10&#160;</span>“Foreigners will build up your walls, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their kings will serve you; </div>
<div class='q'>for in my wrath I struck you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in my favor I have had mercy on you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_11">11&#160;</span>Your gates also shall be open continually; they shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring to you the wealth of the nations, and their kings led captive. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_12">12&#160;</span>For that nation and kingdom that will not serve you shall perish; yes, those nations shall be utterly wasted. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_13">13&#160;</span>“The glory of Lebanon shall come to you, the cypress tree, the pine, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_14">14&#160;</span>The sons of those who afflicted you will come bowing to you; </div>
<div class='q2'>and all those who despised you will bow themselves down at the soles of your feet. </div>
<div class='q'>They will call you Yahweh’s City, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Zion of the Holy One of Israel. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_15">15&#160;</span>“Whereas you have been forsaken and hated, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that no one passed through you, </div>
<div class='q'>I will make you an eternal excellency, </div>
<div class='q2'>a joy of many generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_16">16&#160;</span>You will also drink the milk of the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will nurse from royal breasts. </div>
<div class='q'>Then you will know that I, Yahweh, am your Savior, </div>
<div class='q2'>your Redeemer, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Mighty One of Jacob. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_17">17&#160;</span>For bronze I will bring gold; </div>
<div class='q2'>for iron I will bring silver; </div>
<div class='q2'>for wood, bronze, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for stones, iron. </div>
<div class='q'>I will also make peace your governor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and righteousness your ruler. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_18">18&#160;</span>Violence shall no more be heard in your land, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor desolation or destruction within your borders; </div>
<div class='q'>but you will call your walls Salvation, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your gates Praise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_19">19&#160;</span>The sun will be no more your light by day, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will the brightness of the moon give light to you, </div>
<div class='q'>but Yahweh will be your everlasting light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your God will be your glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_20">20&#160;</span>Your sun will not go down any more, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will your moon withdraw itself; </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh will be your everlasting light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the days of your mourning will end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_21">21&#160;</span>Then your people will all be righteous. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will inherit the land forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>the branch of my planting, </div>
<div class='q2'>the work of my hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I may be glorified. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS60_22">22&#160;</span>The little one will become a thousand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the small one a strong nation. </div>
<div class='q2'>I, Yahweh, will do this quickly in its time.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS61_0'> 61</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_1">1&#160;</span>The Lord Yahweh’s Spirit is on me, </div>
<div class='q2'>because Yahweh has anointed me to preach good news to the humble. </div>
<div class='q'>He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, </div>
<div class='q2'>to proclaim liberty to the captives </div>
<div class='q2'>and release to those who are bound,<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_2">2&#160;</span>to proclaim the year of Yahweh’s favor </div>
<div class='q2'>and the day of vengeance of our God, </div>
<div class='q2'>to comfort all who mourn, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_3">3&#160;</span>to provide for those who mourn in Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>to give to them a garland for ashes, </div>
<div class='q2'>the oil of joy for mourning, </div>
<div class='q2'>the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, </div>
<div class='q'>that they may be called trees of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>the planting of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may be glorified. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_4">4&#160;</span>They will rebuild the old ruins. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will raise up the former devastated places. </div>
<div class='q'>They will repair the ruined cities </div>
<div class='q2'>that have been devastated for many generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_5">5&#160;</span>Strangers will stand and feed your flocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>Foreigners will work your fields and your vineyards. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_6">6&#160;</span>But you will be called Yahweh’s priests. </div>
<div class='q2'>Men will call you the servants of our God. </div>
<div class='q'>You will eat the wealth of the nations. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will boast in their glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_7">7&#160;</span>Instead of your shame you will have double. </div>
<div class='q2'>Instead of dishonor, they will rejoice in their portion. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore in their land they will possess double. </div>
<div class='q2'>Everlasting joy will be to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_8">8&#160;</span>“For I, Yahweh, love justice. </div>
<div class='q2'>I hate robbery and iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>I will give them their reward in truth </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will make an everlasting covenant with them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_9">9&#160;</span>Their offspring will be known among the nations, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their offspring among the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>All who see them will acknowledge them, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they are the offspring which Yahweh has blessed.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_10">10&#160;</span>I will greatly rejoice in Yahweh! </div>
<div class='q2'>My soul will be joyful in my God, </div>
<div class='q'>for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a bridegroom decks himself with a garland </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS61_11">11&#160;</span>For as the earth produces its bud, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring up, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the Lord Yahweh will cause righteousness and praise to spring up before all the nations.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS62_0'> 62</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_1">1&#160;</span>For Zion’s sake I will not hold my peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for Jerusalem’s sake I will not rest, </div>
<div class='q'>until her righteousness shines out like the dawn, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her salvation like a burning lamp. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_2">2&#160;</span>The nations will see your righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all kings your glory. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be called by a new name, </div>
<div class='q2'>which Yahweh’s mouth will name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_3">3&#160;</span>You will also be a crown of beauty in Yahweh’s hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a royal diadem in your God’s hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_4">4&#160;</span>You will not be called Forsaken any more, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will your land be called Desolate any more; </div>
<div class='q'>but you will be called Hephzibah,<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>and your land Beulah;<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>for Yahweh delights in you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your land will be married. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_5">5&#160;</span>For as a young man marries a virgin, </div>
<div class='q2'>so your sons will marry you. </div>
<div class='q'>As a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, </div>
<div class='q2'>so your God will rejoice over you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_6">6&#160;</span>I have set watchmen on your walls, Jerusalem. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will never be silent day nor night. </div>
<div class='q'>You who call on Yahweh, take no rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_7">7&#160;</span>and give him no rest until he establishes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and until he makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh has sworn by his right hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by the arm of his strength, </div>
<div class='q'>“Surely I will no more give your grain to be food for your enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and foreigners will not drink your new wine, for which you have labored, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_9">9&#160;</span>but those who have harvested it will eat it, and praise Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who have gathered it will drink it in the courts of my sanctuary.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_10">10&#160;</span>Go through, go through the gates! </div>
<div class='q2'>Prepare the way of the people! </div>
<div class='q'>Build up, build up the highway! </div>
<div class='q2'>Gather out the stones! </div>
<div class='q2'>Lift up a banner for the peoples. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, Yahweh has proclaimed to the end of the earth: </div>
<div class='q2'>“Say to the daughter of Zion, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Behold, your salvation comes! </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, his reward is with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his recompense before him!’ ” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS62_12">12&#160;</span>They will call them “The Holy People, </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh’s Redeemed”. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be called “Sought Out, </div>
<div class='q2'>A City Not Forsaken”.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS63_0'> 63</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_1">1&#160;</span>Who is this who comes from Edom, </div>
<div class='q2'>with dyed garments from Bozrah? </div>
<div class='q'>Who is this who is glorious in his clothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>marching in the greatness of his strength? </div>
<div class='q'>“It is I who speak in righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>mighty to save.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_2">2&#160;</span>Why is your clothing red, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your garments like him who treads in the wine vat? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_3">3&#160;</span>“I have trodden the wine press alone. </div>
<div class='q2'>Of the peoples, no one was with me. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, I trod them in my anger </div>
<div class='q2'>and trampled them in my wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>Their lifeblood is sprinkled on my garments, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have stained all my clothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_4">4&#160;</span>For the day of vengeance was in my heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the year of my redeemed has come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_5">5&#160;</span>I looked, and there was no one to help; </div>
<div class='q2'>and I wondered that there was no one to uphold. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore my own arm brought salvation to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My own wrath upheld me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_6">6&#160;</span>I trod down the peoples in my anger </div>
<div class='q2'>and made them drunk in my wrath. </div>
<div class='q2'>I poured their lifeblood out on the earth.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_7">7&#160;</span>I will tell of the loving kindnesses of Yahweh </div>
<div class='q2'>and the praises of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>according to all that Yahweh has given to us, </div>
<div class='q'>and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, </div>
<div class='q2'>which he has given to them according to his mercies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_8">8&#160;</span>For he said, “Surely, they are my people, </div>
<div class='q2'>children who will not deal falsely;” </div>
<div class='q2'>so he became their Savior. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_9">9&#160;</span>In all their affliction he was afflicted, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the angel of his presence saved them. </div>
<div class='q'>In his love and in his pity he redeemed them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He bore them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and carried them all the days of old. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_10">10&#160;</span>But they rebelled </div>
<div class='q2'>and grieved his Holy Spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore he turned and became their enemy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he himself fought against them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_11">11&#160;</span>Then he remembered the days of old, </div>
<div class='q2'>Moses and his people, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>“Where is he who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is he who put his Holy Spirit among them?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_12">12&#160;</span>Who caused his glorious arm to be at Moses’ right hand? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who divided the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_13">13&#160;</span>Who led them through the depths, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a horse in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that they didn’t stumble? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_14">14&#160;</span>As the livestock that go down into the valley, </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh’s Spirit caused them to rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>So you led your people to make yourself a glorious name. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_15">15&#160;</span>Look down from heaven, </div>
<div class='q2'>and see from the habitation of your holiness and of your glory. </div>
<div class='q'>Where are your zeal and your mighty acts? </div>
<div class='q2'>The yearning of your heart and your compassion is restrained toward me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_16">16&#160;</span>For you are our Father, </div>
<div class='q2'>though Abraham doesn’t know us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Israel does not acknowledge us. </div>
<div class='q'>You, Yahweh, are our Father. </div>
<div class='q2'>Our Redeemer from everlasting is your name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_17">17&#160;</span>O Yahweh, why do you make us wander from your ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and harden our heart from your fear? </div>
<div class='q'>Return for your servants’ sake, </div>
<div class='q2'>the tribes of your inheritance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_18">18&#160;</span>Your holy people possessed it but a little while. </div>
<div class='q2'>Our adversaries have trodden down your sanctuary. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS63_19">19&#160;</span>We have become like those over whom you never ruled, </div>
<div class='q2'>like those who were not called by your name.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS64_0'> 64</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_1">1&#160;</span>Oh that you would tear the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you would come down, </div>
<div class='q2'>that the mountains might quake at your presence— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_2">2&#160;</span>as when fire kindles the brushwood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fire causes the water to boil. </div>
<div class='q'>Make your name known to your adversaries, </div>
<div class='q2'>that the nations may tremble at your presence! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_3">3&#160;</span>When you did awesome things which we didn’t look for, </div>
<div class='q2'>you came down, and the mountains quaked at your presence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_4">4&#160;</span>For from of old men have not heard, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor perceived by the ear, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor has the eye seen a God besides you, </div>
<div class='q2'>who works for him who waits for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_5">5&#160;</span>You meet him who rejoices and does righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who remember you in your ways. </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, you were angry, and we sinned. </div>
<div class='q2'>We have been in sin for a long time. </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall we be saved? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_6">6&#160;</span>For we have all become like one who is unclean, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all our righteousness is like a polluted garment. </div>
<div class='q'>We all fade like a leaf; </div>
<div class='q2'>and our iniquities, like the wind, take us away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_7">7&#160;</span>There is no one who calls on your name, </div>
<div class='q2'>who stirs himself up to take hold of you; </div>
<div class='q'>for you have hidden your face from us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have consumed us by means of our iniquities. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_8">8&#160;</span>But now, Yahweh, you are our Father. </div>
<div class='q2'>We are the clay and you our potter. </div>
<div class='q2'>We all are the work of your hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t be furious, Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t remember iniquity forever. </div>
<div class='q'>Look and see, we beg you, </div>
<div class='q2'>we are all your people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_10">10&#160;</span>Your holy cities have become a wilderness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Zion has become a wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>Jerusalem a desolation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_11">11&#160;</span>Our holy and our beautiful house where our fathers praised you </div>
<div class='q2'>is burned with fire. </div>
<div class='q2'>All our pleasant places are laid waste. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS64_12">12&#160;</span>Will you hold yourself back for these things, Yahweh? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you keep silent and punish us very severely?  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='IS65_0'> 65</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_1">1&#160;</span>“I am inquired of by those who didn’t ask. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am found by those who didn’t seek me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I said, ‘See me, see me,’ to a nation that was not called by my name. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_2">2&#160;</span>I have spread out my hands all day to a rebellious people, </div>
<div class='q2'>who walk in a way that is not good, </div>
<div class='q2'>after their own thoughts; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_3">3&#160;</span>a people who provoke me to my face continually, </div>
<div class='q2'>sacrificing in gardens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and burning incense on bricks; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_4">4&#160;</span>who sit among the graves, </div>
<div class='q2'>and spend nights in secret places; </div>
<div class='q'>who eat pig’s meat, </div>
<div class='q2'>and broth of abominable things is in their vessels; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_5">5&#160;</span>who say, ‘Stay by yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t come near to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am holier than you.’ </div>
<div class='q'>These are smoke in my nose, </div>
<div class='q2'>a fire that burns all day. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_6">6&#160;</span>“Behold, it is written before me: </div>
<div class='q2'>I will not keep silence, </div>
<div class='q2'>but will repay, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, I will repay into their bosom </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_7">7&#160;</span>your own iniquities and the iniquities of your fathers together”, says Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>“who have burned incense on the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>and blasphemed me on the hills. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I will first measure their work into their bosom.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“As the new wine is found in the cluster, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one says, ‘Don’t destroy it, for a blessing is in it:’ </div>
<div class='q'>so I will do for my servants’ sake, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I may not destroy them all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_9">9&#160;</span>I will bring offspring out of Jacob, </div>
<div class='q2'>and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains. </div>
<div class='q'>My chosen will inherit it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my servants will dwell there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_10">10&#160;</span>Sharon will be a fold of flocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in, </div>
<div class='q2'>for my people who have sought me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_11">11&#160;</span>“But you who forsake Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>who forget my holy mountain, </div>
<div class='q2'>who prepare a table for Fortune, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who fill up mixed wine to Destiny; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_12">12&#160;</span>I will destine you to the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will all bow down to the slaughter; </div>
<div class='q'>because when I called, you didn’t answer. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I spoke, you didn’t listen; </div>
<div class='q'>but you did that which was evil in my eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and chose that in which I didn’t delight.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_13">13&#160;</span>Therefore the Lord Yahweh says, </div>
<div class='q'>“Behold, my servants will eat, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will be hungry; </div>
<div class='q'>behold, my servants will drink, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will be thirsty. </div>
<div class='q'>Behold, my servants will rejoice, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, my servants will sing for joy of heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you will cry for sorrow of heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will wail for anguish of spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_15">15&#160;</span>You will leave your name for a curse to my chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Lord Yahweh will kill you. </div>
<div class='q'>He will call his servants by another name, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_16">16&#160;</span>so that he who blesses himself in the earth will bless himself in the God of truth; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who swears in the earth will swear by the God of truth; </div>
<div class='q'>because the former troubles are forgotten, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because they are hidden from my eyes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_17">17&#160;</span>“For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the former things will not be remembered, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor come into mind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_18">18&#160;</span>But be glad and rejoice forever in that which I create; </div>
<div class='q2'>for, behold, I create Jerusalem to be a delight, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her people a joy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_19">19&#160;</span>I will rejoice in Jerusalem, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delight in my people; </div>
<div class='q'>and the voice of weeping and the voice of crying </div>
<div class='q2'>will be heard in her no more. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_20">20&#160;</span>“No more will there be an infant who only lives a few days, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor an old man who has not filled his days; </div>
<div class='q'>for the child will die one hundred years old, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the sinner being one hundred years old will be accursed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_21">21&#160;</span>They will build houses and inhabit them. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will plant vineyards and eat their fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_22">22&#160;</span>They will not build and another inhabit. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will not plant and another eat; </div>
<div class='q'>for the days of my people will be like the days of a tree, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my chosen will long enjoy the work of their hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_23">23&#160;</span>They will not labor in vain </div>
<div class='q2'>nor give birth for calamity; </div>
<div class='q'>for they are the offspring of Yahweh’s blessed </div>
<div class='q2'>and their descendants with them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_24">24&#160;</span>It will happen that before they call, I will answer; </div>
<div class='q2'>and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS65_25">25&#160;</span>The wolf and the lamb will feed together. </div>
<div class='q2'>The lion will eat straw like the ox. </div>
<div class='q2'>Dust will be the serpent’s food. </div>
<div class='q'>They will not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain,” </div>
<div class='q2'>says Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='IS66_0'>66</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh says: </div>
<div class='q'>“Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. </div>
<div class='q2'>What kind of house will you build to me? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where will I rest? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_2">2&#160;</span>For my hand has made all these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and so all these things came to be,” says Yahweh: </div>
<div class='q'>“but I will look to this man, </div>
<div class='q2'>even to he who is poor and of a contrite spirit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and who trembles at my word. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_3">3&#160;</span>He who kills an ox is as he who kills a man; </div>
<div class='q2'>he who sacrifices a lamb, as he who breaks a dog’s neck; </div>
<div class='q2'>he who offers an offering, as he who offers pig’s blood; </div>
<div class='q2'>he who burns frankincense, as he who blesses an idol. </div>
<div class='q'>Yes, they have chosen their own ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their soul delights in their abominations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_4">4&#160;</span>I also will choose their delusions, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will bring their fears on them, </div>
<div class='q'>because when I called, no one answered; </div>
<div class='q2'>when I spoke, they didn’t listen, </div>
<div class='q'>but they did that which was evil in my eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and chose that in which I didn’t delight.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_5">5&#160;</span>Hear Yahweh’s word, </div>
<div class='q2'>you who tremble at his word: </div>
<div class='q'>“Your brothers who hate you, </div>
<div class='q2'>who cast you out for my name’s sake, have said, </div>
<div class='q'>‘Let Yahweh be glorified, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may see your joy;’ </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is those who shall be disappointed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_6">6&#160;</span>A voice of tumult from the city, </div>
<div class='q2'>a voice from the temple, </div>
<div class='q2'>a voice of Yahweh that repays his enemies what they deserve. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_7">7&#160;</span>“Before she travailed, she gave birth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Before her pain came, she delivered a son. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_8">8&#160;</span>Who has heard of such a thing? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has seen such things? </div>
<div class='q'>Shall a land be born in one day? </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall a nation be born at once? </div>
<div class='q'>For as soon as Zion travailed, </div>
<div class='q2'>she gave birth to her children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_9">9&#160;</span>Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to be delivered?” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Shall I who cause to give birth shut the womb?” says your God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_10">10&#160;</span>“Rejoice with Jerusalem, and be glad for her, all you who love her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Rejoice for joy with her, all you who mourn over her; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_11">11&#160;</span>that you may nurse and be satisfied at the comforting breasts; </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may drink deeply, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_12">12&#160;</span>For Yahweh says, “Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the glory of the nations like an overflowing stream, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you will nurse. </div>
<div class='q'>You will be carried on her side, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be dandled on her knees. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_13">13&#160;</span>As one whom his mother comforts, </div>
<div class='q2'>so I will comfort you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will be comforted in Jerusalem.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_14">14&#160;</span>You will see it, and your heart shall rejoice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your bones will flourish like the tender grass. </div>
<div class='q'>Yahweh’s hand will be known among his servants; </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will have indignation against his enemies. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_15">15&#160;</span>For, behold, Yahweh will come with fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his chariots will be like the whirlwind; </div>
<div class='q'>to render his anger with fierceness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his rebuke with flames of fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_16">16&#160;</span>For Yahweh will execute judgment by fire and by his sword on all flesh; </div>
<div class='q2'>and those slain by Yahweh will be many. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_17">17&#160;</span>“Those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves to go to the gardens, following one in the middle, eating pig’s meat, abominable things, and the mouse, they shall come to an end together,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_18">18&#160;</span>“For I know their works and their thoughts. The time comes that I will gather all nations and languages, and they will come, and will see my glory. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_19">19&#160;</span>“I will set a sign among them, and I will send those who escape of them to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, who draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to far-away islands, who have not heard my fame, nor have seen my glory; and they shall declare my glory among the nations. 
<span class="verse" id="IS66_20">20&#160;</span>They shall bring all your brothers out of all the nations for an offering to Yahweh, on horses, in chariots, in litters, on mules, and on camels, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, says Yahweh, as the children of Israel bring their offering in a clean vessel into Yahweh’s house. 
<span class="verse" id="IS66_21">21&#160;</span>Of them I will also select priests and Levites,” says Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="IS66_22">22&#160;</span>“For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me,” says Yahweh, “so your offspring and your name shall remain. 
<span class="verse" id="IS66_23">23&#160;</span>It shall happen that from one new moon to another, and from one Sabbath to another, all flesh will come to worship before me,” says Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="IS66_24">24&#160;</span>“They will go out, and look at the dead bodies of the men who have transgressed against me; for their worm will not die, nor will their fire be quenched, and they will be loathsome to all mankind.” </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:2</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:4</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:10</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_24"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:24</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “Lord” is “Adonai.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS1_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:25</a>
 <span class="ft">tin is a metal that is separated from silver during the refining and purification process.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS3_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:10</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, ten yokes, or the amount of land that ten yokes of oxen can plow in one day, which is about 10 acres or 4 hectares.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 bath is about 22 liters or 5.8 U. S. gallons</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_10"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 homer is about 220 liters or 6 bushels</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_10"><span class="notemark">§</span> 5:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or 0.6 bushels or about 2 pecks—only one tenth of what was sown.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS5_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:14</a>
 <span class="ft">“Immanuel” means “God with us”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS7_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:23</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces, so 1000 shekels is about 10 kilograms or 22 pounds.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS8_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Maher Shalal Hash Baz” means “quick to the plunder, swift to the prey”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS14_15"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 14:15</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS25_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 25:6</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, fat things</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28:15</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS28_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS29_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 29:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, Ariel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS34_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 34:14</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, lilith, which could also be a night demon or night monster</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 38:10</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS38_18"><span class="notemark">†</span> 38:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS45_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 45:5</a>
 <span class="ft">or, equip</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS52_15"><span class="notemark">*</span> 52:15</a>
 <span class="ft">or, sprinkle</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS53_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 53:11</a>
 <span class="ft">So read the Dead Sea Scrolls and Septuagint. Masoretic Text omits “the light”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS57_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 57:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS61_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 61:1</a>
 <span class="ft">LXX and DSS add: recovery of sight to the blind</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 62:4</a>
 <span class="ft">Hephzibah means “I delight in her”.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#IS62_4"><span class="notemark">†</span> 62:4</a>
 <span class="ft">Beulah means “married”</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
