<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Job 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Job</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB31_0'>31</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB32_0'>32</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB33_0'>33</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB34_0'>34</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB35_0'>35</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB36_0'>36</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB37_0'>37</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB38_0'>38</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB39_0'>39</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB40_0'>40</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB41_0'>41</a></li>
<li><a href='JOB.xhtml#JB42_0'>42</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='JB0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Book of </div>
<div class='mt'>Job  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="JB1_1">1&#160;</span>There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job. That man was blameless and upright, and one who feared God,<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and turned away from evil. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_2">2&#160;</span>There were born to him seven sons and three daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_3">3&#160;</span>His possessions also were seven thousand sheep, three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred female donkeys, and a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the children of the east. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_4">4&#160;</span>His sons went and held a feast in the house of each one on his birthday; and they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_5">5&#160;</span>It was so, when the days of their feasting had run their course, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, “It may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts.” Job did so continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_6">6&#160;</span>Now on the day when God’s sons came to present themselves before Yahweh,<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Satan also came among them. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_7">7&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Where have you come from?” </div>
<div class='p'>Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “From going back and forth in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant, Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_9">9&#160;</span>Then Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “Does Job fear God for nothing? 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_10">10&#160;</span>Haven’t you made a hedge around him, and around his house, and around all that he has, on every side? You have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_11">11&#160;</span>But stretch out your hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will renounce you to your face.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Behold,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> all that he has is in your power. Only on himself don’t stretch out your hand.” </div>
<div class='p'>So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_13">13&#160;</span>It fell on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_14">14&#160;</span>that a messenger came to Job, and said, “The oxen were plowing, and the donkeys feeding beside them, 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_15">15&#160;</span>and the Sabeans attacked, and took them away. Yes, they have killed the servants with the edge of the sword, and I alone have escaped to tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_16">16&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, another also came and said, “The fire of God has fallen from the sky, and has burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them, and I alone have escaped to tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_17">17&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, another also came and said, “The Chaldeans made three bands, and swept down on the camels, and have taken them away, yes, and killed the servants with the edge of the sword; and I alone have escaped to tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_18">18&#160;</span>While he was still speaking, there came also another, and said, “Your sons and your daughters were eating and drinking wine in their oldest brother’s house, 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_19">19&#160;</span>and behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on the young men, and they are dead. I alone have escaped to tell you.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB1_20">20&#160;</span>Then Job arose, and tore his robe, and shaved his head, and fell down on the ground, and worshiped. 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_21">21&#160;</span>He said, “Naked I came out of my mother’s womb, and naked will I return there. Yahweh gave, and Yahweh has taken away. Blessed be Yahweh’s name.” 
<span class="verse" id="JB1_22">22&#160;</span>In all this, Job didn’t sin, nor charge God with wrongdoing.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_1">1&#160;</span>Again, on the day when God’s sons came to present themselves before Yahweh, Satan came also among them to present himself before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_2">2&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Where have you come from?” </div>
<div class='p'>Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “From going back and forth in the earth, and from walking up and down in it.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Have you considered my servant Job? For there is no one like him in the earth, a blameless and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil. He still maintains his integrity, although you incited me against him, to ruin him without cause.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_4">4&#160;</span>Satan answered Yahweh, and said, “Skin for skin. Yes, all that a man has he will give for his life. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_5">5&#160;</span>But stretch out your hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will renounce you to your face.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_6">6&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Satan, “Behold, he is in your hand. Only spare his life.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_7">7&#160;</span>So Satan went out from the presence of Yahweh, and struck Job with painful sores from the sole of his foot to his head. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_8">8&#160;</span>He took for himself a potsherd to scrape himself with, and he sat among the ashes. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_9">9&#160;</span>Then his wife said to him, “Do you still maintain your integrity? Renounce God, and die.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB2_10">10&#160;</span>But he said to her, “You speak as one of the foolish women would speak. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?” </div>
<div class='p'>In all this Job didn’t sin with his lips. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_11">11&#160;</span>Now when Job’s three friends heard of all this evil that had come on him, they each came from his own place: Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite; and they made an appointment together to come to sympathize with him and to comfort him. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_12">12&#160;</span>When they lifted up their eyes from a distance, and didn’t recognize him, they raised their voices, and wept; and they each tore his robe, and sprinkled dust on their heads toward the sky. 
<span class="verse" id="JB2_13">13&#160;</span>So they sat down with him on the ground seven days and seven nights, and no one spoke a word to him, for they saw that his grief was very great.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_1">1&#160;</span>After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed the day of his birth. 
<span class="verse" id="JB3_2">2&#160;</span>Job answered: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_3">3&#160;</span>“Let the day perish in which I was born, </div>
<div class='q2'>the night which said, ‘There is a boy conceived.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_4">4&#160;</span>Let that day be darkness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let God from above seek for it, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither let the light shine on it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_5">5&#160;</span>Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let a cloud dwell on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let all that makes the day black terrify it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_6">6&#160;</span>As for that night, let thick darkness seize on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let it not rejoice among the days of the year. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let it not come into the number of the months. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, let that night be barren. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let no joyful voice come therein. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_8">8&#160;</span>Let them curse it who curse the day, </div>
<div class='q2'>who are ready to rouse up leviathan. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_9">9&#160;</span>Let the stars of its twilight be dark. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let it look for light, but have none, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither let it see the eyelids of the morning, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_10">10&#160;</span>because it didn’t shut up the doors of my mother’s womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor did it hide trouble from my eyes. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_11">11&#160;</span>“Why didn’t I die from the womb? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why didn’t I give up the spirit when my mother bore me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_12">12&#160;</span>Why did the knees receive me? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or why the breast, that I should nurse? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_13">13&#160;</span>For now I should have lain down and been quiet. </div>
<div class='q2'>I should have slept, then I would have been at rest, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_14">14&#160;</span>with kings and counselors of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>who built up waste places for themselves; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_15">15&#160;</span>or with princes who had gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>who filled their houses with silver; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_16">16&#160;</span>or as a hidden untimely birth I had not been, </div>
<div class='q2'>as infants who never saw light. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_17">17&#160;</span>There the wicked cease from troubling. </div>
<div class='q2'>There the weary are at rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_18">18&#160;</span>There the prisoners are at ease together. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t hear the voice of the taskmaster. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_19">19&#160;</span>The small and the great are there. </div>
<div class='q2'>The servant is free from his master. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_20">20&#160;</span>“Why is light given to him who is in misery, </div>
<div class='q2'>life to the bitter in soul, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_21">21&#160;</span>who long for death, but it doesn’t come; </div>
<div class='q2'>and dig for it more than for hidden treasures, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_22">22&#160;</span>who rejoice exceedingly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are glad, when they can find the grave? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_23">23&#160;</span>Why is light given to a man whose way is hidden, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom God has hedged in? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_24">24&#160;</span>For my sighing comes before I eat. </div>
<div class='q2'>My groanings are poured out like water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_25">25&#160;</span>For the thing which I fear comes on me, </div>
<div class='q2'>that which I am afraid of comes to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB3_26">26&#160;</span>I am not at ease, neither am I quiet, neither do I have rest; </div>
<div class='q2'>but trouble comes.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_1">1&#160;</span>Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_2">2&#160;</span>“If someone ventures to talk with you, will you be grieved? </div>
<div class='q2'>But who can withhold himself from speaking? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_3">3&#160;</span>Behold, you have instructed many, </div>
<div class='q2'>you have strengthened the weak hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_4">4&#160;</span>Your words have supported him who was falling, </div>
<div class='q2'>you have made the feeble knees firm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_5">5&#160;</span>But now it has come to you, and you faint. </div>
<div class='q2'>It touches you, and you are troubled. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_6">6&#160;</span>Isn’t your piety your confidence? </div>
<div class='q2'>Isn’t the integrity of your ways your hope? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_7">7&#160;</span>“Remember, now, whoever perished, being innocent? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or where were the upright cut off? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_8">8&#160;</span>According to what I have seen, those who plow iniquity </div>
<div class='q2'>and sow trouble, reap the same. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_9">9&#160;</span>By the breath of God they perish. </div>
<div class='q2'>By the blast of his anger are they consumed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_10">10&#160;</span>The roaring of the lion, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the voice of the fierce lion, </div>
<div class='q2'>the teeth of the young lions, are broken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_11">11&#160;</span>The old lion perishes for lack of prey. </div>
<div class='q2'>The cubs of the lioness are scattered abroad. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_12">12&#160;</span>“Now a thing was secretly brought to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My ear received a whisper of it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_13">13&#160;</span>In thoughts from the visions of the night, </div>
<div class='q2'>when deep sleep falls on men, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_14">14&#160;</span>fear came on me, and trembling, </div>
<div class='q2'>which made all my bones shake. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_15">15&#160;</span>Then a spirit passed before my face. </div>
<div class='q2'>The hair of my flesh stood up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_16">16&#160;</span>It stood still, but I couldn’t discern its appearance. </div>
<div class='q2'>A form was before my eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Silence, then I heard a voice, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_17">17&#160;</span>‘Shall mortal man be more just than God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall a man be more pure than his Maker? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, he puts no trust in his servants. </div>
<div class='q2'>He charges his angels with error. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_19">19&#160;</span>How much more those who dwell in houses of clay, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose foundation is in the dust, </div>
<div class='q2'>who are crushed before the moth! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_20">20&#160;</span>Between morning and evening they are destroyed. </div>
<div class='q2'>They perish forever without any regarding it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB4_21">21&#160;</span>Isn’t their tent cord plucked up within them? </div>
<div class='q2'>They die, and that without wisdom.’  </div>
<div class='b' id='JB5_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 5</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_1">1&#160;</span>“Call now; is there any who will answer you? </div>
<div class='q2'>To which of the holy ones will you turn? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_2">2&#160;</span>For resentment kills the foolish man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and jealousy kills the simple. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_3">3&#160;</span>I have seen the foolish taking root, </div>
<div class='q2'>but suddenly I cursed his habitation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_4">4&#160;</span>His children are far from safety. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are crushed in the gate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Neither is there any to deliver them, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_5">5&#160;</span>whose harvest the hungry eat up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and take it even out of the thorns. </div>
<div class='q2'>The snare gapes for their substance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_6">6&#160;</span>For affliction doesn’t come out of the dust, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does trouble spring out of the ground; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_7">7&#160;</span>but man is born to trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the sparks fly upward. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_8">8&#160;</span>“But as for me, I would seek God. </div>
<div class='q2'>I would commit my cause to God, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_9">9&#160;</span>who does great things that can’t be fathomed, </div>
<div class='q2'>marvelous things without number; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_10">10&#160;</span>who gives rain on the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sends waters on the fields; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_11">11&#160;</span>so that he sets up on high those who are low, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who mourn are exalted to safety. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_12">12&#160;</span>He frustrates the plans of the crafty, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that their hands can’t perform their enterprise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_13">13&#160;</span>He takes the wise in their own craftiness; </div>
<div class='q2'>the counsel of the cunning is carried headlong. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_14">14&#160;</span>They meet with darkness in the day time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and grope at noonday as in the night. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_15">15&#160;</span>But he saves from the sword of their mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the needy from the hand of the mighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_16">16&#160;</span>So the poor has hope, </div>
<div class='q2'>and injustice shuts her mouth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_17">17&#160;</span>“Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore do not despise the chastening of the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_18">18&#160;</span>For he wounds and binds up. </div>
<div class='q2'>He injures and his hands make whole. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_19">19&#160;</span>He will deliver you in six troubles; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, in seven no evil will touch you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_20">20&#160;</span>In famine he will redeem you from death; </div>
<div class='q2'>in war, from the power of the sword. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_21">21&#160;</span>You will be hidden from the scourge of the tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will you be afraid of destruction when it comes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_22">22&#160;</span> You will laugh at destruction and famine, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will you be afraid of the animals of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_23">23&#160;</span>For you will be allied with the stones of the field. </div>
<div class='q2'>The animals of the field will be at peace with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_24">24&#160;</span>You will know that your tent is in peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will visit your fold, and will miss nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_25">25&#160;</span>You will know also that your offspring<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> will be great, </div>
<div class='q2'>your offspring as the grass of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_26">26&#160;</span>You will come to your grave in a full age, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a shock of grain comes in its season. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB5_27">27&#160;</span>Behold, we have researched it. It is so. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hear it, and know it for your good.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_2">2&#160;</span>“Oh that my anguish were weighed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all my calamity laid in the balances! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_3">3&#160;</span>For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas, </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore my words have been rash. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_4">4&#160;</span>For the arrows of the Almighty are within me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My spirit drinks up their poison. </div>
<div class='q'>The terrors of God set themselves in array against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_5">5&#160;</span>Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass? </div>
<div class='q'>Or does the ox low over his fodder? </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_6">6&#160;</span>Can that which has no flavor be eaten without salt? </div>
<div class='q'>Or is there any taste in the white of an egg? </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_7">7&#160;</span>My soul refuses to touch them. </div>
<div class='q'>They are as loathsome food to me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_8">8&#160;</span>“Oh that I might have my request, </div>
<div class='q2'>that God would grant the thing that I long for, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_9">9&#160;</span>even that it would please God to crush me; </div>
<div class='q2'>that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_10">10&#160;</span>Let it still be my consolation, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, let me exult in pain that doesn’t spare, </div>
<div class='q2'>that I have not denied the words of the Holy One. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_11">11&#160;</span>What is my strength, that I should wait? </div>
<div class='q2'>What is my end, that I should be patient? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_12">12&#160;</span>Is my strength the strength of stones? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or is my flesh of bronze? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_13">13&#160;</span>Isn’t it that I have no help in me, </div>
<div class='q2'>that wisdom is driven away from me? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_14">14&#160;</span>“To him who is ready to faint, kindness should be shown from his friend; </div>
<div class='q2'>even to him who forsakes the fear of the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_15">15&#160;</span>My brothers have dealt deceitfully as a brook, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the channel of brooks that pass away; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_16">16&#160;</span>which are black by reason of the ice, </div>
<div class='q2'>in which the snow hides itself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_17">17&#160;</span>In the dry season, they vanish. </div>
<div class='q2'>When it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_18">18&#160;</span>The caravans that travel beside them turn away. </div>
<div class='q2'>They go up into the waste, and perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_19">19&#160;</span>The caravans of Tema looked. </div>
<div class='q2'>The companies of Sheba waited for them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_20">20&#160;</span>They were distressed because they were confident. </div>
<div class='q2'>They came there, and were confounded. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_21">21&#160;</span>For now you are nothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>You see a terror, and are afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_22">22&#160;</span>Did I ever say, ‘Give to me?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or, ‘Offer a present for me from your substance?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_23">23&#160;</span>or, ‘Deliver me from the adversary’s hand?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or, ‘Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_24">24&#160;</span>“Teach me, and I will hold my peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>Cause me to understand my error. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_25">25&#160;</span>How forcible are words of uprightness! </div>
<div class='q2'>But your reproof, what does it reprove? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_26">26&#160;</span>Do you intend to reprove words, </div>
<div class='q2'>since the speeches of one who is desperate are as wind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_27">27&#160;</span>Yes, you would even cast lots for the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make merchandise of your friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_28">28&#160;</span>Now therefore be pleased to look at me, </div>
<div class='q2'>for surely I will not lie to your face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_29">29&#160;</span>Please return. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let there be no injustice. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, return again. </div>
<div class='q2'>My cause is righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB6_30">30&#160;</span>Is there injustice on my tongue? </div>
<div class='q2'>Can’t my taste discern mischievous things?  </div>
<div class='b' id='JB7_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 7</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_1">1&#160;</span>“Isn’t a man forced to labor on earth? </div>
<div class='q2'>Aren’t his days like the days of a hired hand? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_2">2&#160;</span>As a servant who earnestly desires the shadow, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a hireling who looks for his wages, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_3">3&#160;</span>so I am made to possess months of misery, </div>
<div class='q2'>wearisome nights are appointed to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_4">4&#160;</span>When I lie down, I say, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘When will I arise, and the night be gone?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>I toss and turn until the dawning of the day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_5">5&#160;</span>My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust. </div>
<div class='q2'>My skin closes up, and breaks out afresh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_6">6&#160;</span>My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are spent without hope. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_7">7&#160;</span>Oh remember that my life is a breath. </div>
<div class='q2'>My eye will no more see good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_8">8&#160;</span>The eye of him who sees me will see me no more. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your eyes will be on me, but I will not be. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_9">9&#160;</span>As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, </div>
<div class='q2'>so he who goes down to Sheol<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> will come up no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_10">10&#160;</span>He will return no more to his house, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will his place know him any more. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_11">11&#160;</span>“Therefore I will not keep silent. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will speak in the anguish of my spirit. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_12">12&#160;</span>Am I a sea, or a sea monster, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you put a guard over me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_13">13&#160;</span>When I say, ‘My bed will comfort me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My couch will ease my complaint,’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_14">14&#160;</span>then you scare me with dreams </div>
<div class='q2'>and terrify me through visions, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_15">15&#160;</span>so that my soul chooses strangling, </div>
<div class='q2'>death rather than my bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_16">16&#160;</span>I loathe my life. </div>
<div class='q2'>I don’t want to live forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>Leave me alone, for my days are but a breath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_17">17&#160;</span>What is man, that you should magnify him, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you should set your mind on him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_18">18&#160;</span>that you should visit him every morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and test him every moment? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_19">19&#160;</span>How long will you not look away from me, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor leave me alone until I swallow down my spittle? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_20">20&#160;</span>If I have sinned, what do I do to you, you watcher of men? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why have you set me as a mark for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that I am a burden to myself? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB7_21">21&#160;</span>Why do you not pardon my disobedience, and take away my iniquity? </div>
<div class='q2'>For now will I lie down in the dust. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will seek me diligently, but I will not be.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_1">1&#160;</span>Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_2">2&#160;</span>“How long will you speak these things? </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall the words of your mouth be a mighty wind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_3">3&#160;</span>Does God pervert justice? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or does the Almighty pervert righteousness? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_4">4&#160;</span>If your children have sinned against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>he has delivered them into the hand of their disobedience. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_5">5&#160;</span>If you want to seek God diligently, </div>
<div class='q2'>make your supplication to the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_6">6&#160;</span>If you were pure and upright, </div>
<div class='q2'>surely now he would awaken for you, </div>
<div class='q'>and make the habitation of your righteousness prosperous. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_7">7&#160;</span>Though your beginning was small, </div>
<div class='q'>yet your latter end would greatly increase. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_8">8&#160;</span>“Please inquire of past generations. </div>
<div class='q2'>Find out about the learning of their fathers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_9">9&#160;</span>(For we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>because our days on earth are a shadow.) </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_10">10&#160;</span>Shall they not teach you, tell you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and utter words out of their heart? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_11">11&#160;</span>“Can the papyrus grow up without mire? </div>
<div class='q2'>Can the rushes grow without water? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_12">12&#160;</span>While it is yet in its greenness, not cut down, </div>
<div class='q2'>it withers before any other reed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_13">13&#160;</span>So are the paths of all who forget God. </div>
<div class='q2'>The hope of the godless man will perish, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_14">14&#160;</span>whose confidence will break apart, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose trust is a spider’s web. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_15">15&#160;</span>He will lean on his house, but it will not stand. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will cling to it, but it will not endure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_16">16&#160;</span>He is green before the sun. </div>
<div class='q2'>His shoots go out along his garden. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_17">17&#160;</span>His roots are wrapped around the rock pile. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sees the place of stones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_18">18&#160;</span>If he is destroyed from his place, </div>
<div class='q2'>then it will deny him, saying, ‘I have not seen you.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, this is the joy of his way. </div>
<div class='q2'>Out of the earth, others will spring. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_20">20&#160;</span>“Behold, God will not cast away a blameless man, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will he uphold the evildoers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_21">21&#160;</span>He will still fill your mouth with laughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>your lips with shouting. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB8_22">22&#160;</span>Those who hate you will be clothed with shame. </div>
<div class='q2'>The tent of the wicked will be no more.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_2">2&#160;</span>“Truly I know that it is so, </div>
<div class='q2'>but how can man be just with God? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_3">3&#160;</span>If he is pleased to contend with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>he can’t answer him one time in a thousand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_4">4&#160;</span>God is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has hardened himself against him and prospered? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_5">5&#160;</span>He removes the mountains, and they don’t know it, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he overturns them in his anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_6">6&#160;</span>He shakes the earth out of its place. </div>
<div class='q2'>Its pillars tremble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_7">7&#160;</span>He commands the sun and it doesn’t rise, </div>
<div class='q2'>and seals up the stars. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_8">8&#160;</span>He alone stretches out the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and treads on the waves of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_9">9&#160;</span>He makes the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rooms of the south. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_10">10&#160;</span>He does great things past finding out; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, marvelous things without number. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_11">11&#160;</span>Behold, he goes by me, and I don’t see him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He passes on also, but I don’t perceive him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_12">12&#160;</span>Behold, he snatches away. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who can hinder him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will ask him, ‘What are you doing?’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_13">13&#160;</span>“God will not withdraw his anger. </div>
<div class='q2'>The helpers of Rahab stoop under him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_14">14&#160;</span>How much less will I answer him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and choose my words to argue with him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_15">15&#160;</span>Though I were righteous, yet I wouldn’t answer him. </div>
<div class='q2'>I would make supplication to my judge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_16">16&#160;</span>If I had called, and he had answered me, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet I wouldn’t believe that he listened to my voice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_17">17&#160;</span>For he breaks me with a storm, </div>
<div class='q2'>and multiplies my wounds without cause. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_18">18&#160;</span>He will not allow me to catch my breath, </div>
<div class='q2'>but fills me with bitterness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_19">19&#160;</span>If it is a matter of strength, behold, he is mighty! </div>
<div class='q2'>If of justice, ‘Who,’ says he, ‘will summon me?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_20">20&#160;</span>Though I am righteous, my own mouth will condemn me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though I am blameless, it will prove me perverse. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_21">21&#160;</span>I am blameless. </div>
<div class='q2'>I don’t respect myself. </div>
<div class='q2'>I despise my life. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_22">22&#160;</span>“It is all the same. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I say he destroys the blameless and the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_23">23&#160;</span>If the scourge kills suddenly, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will mock at the trial of the innocent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_24">24&#160;</span>The earth is given into the hand of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>He covers the faces of its judges. </div>
<div class='q2'>If not he, then who is it? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_25">25&#160;</span>“Now my days are swifter than a runner. </div>
<div class='q2'>They flee away. They see no good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_26">26&#160;</span>They have passed away as the swift ships, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the eagle that swoops on the prey. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_27">27&#160;</span>If I say, ‘I will forget my complaint, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will put off my sad face, and cheer up,’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_28">28&#160;</span>I am afraid of all my sorrows. </div>
<div class='q2'>I know that you will not hold me innocent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_29">29&#160;</span>I will be condemned. </div>
<div class='q2'>Why then do I labor in vain? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_30">30&#160;</span>If I wash myself with snow, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cleanse my hands with lye, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_31">31&#160;</span>yet you will plunge me in the ditch. </div>
<div class='q2'>My own clothes will abhor me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_32">32&#160;</span>For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we should come together in judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_33">33&#160;</span>There is no umpire between us, </div>
<div class='q2'>that might lay his hand on us both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_34">34&#160;</span>Let him take his rod away from me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let his terror not make me afraid; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB9_35">35&#160;</span>then I would speak, and not fear him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I am not so in myself. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB10_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 10</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_1">1&#160;</span>“My soul is weary of my life. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will give free course to my complaint. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_2">2&#160;</span>I will tell God, ‘Do not condemn me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Show me why you contend with me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_3">3&#160;</span>Is it good to you that you should oppress, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you should despise the work of your hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and smile on the counsel of the wicked? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_4">4&#160;</span>Do you have eyes of flesh? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or do you see as man sees? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_5">5&#160;</span>Are your days as the days of mortals, </div>
<div class='q2'>or your years as man’s years, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_6">6&#160;</span>that you inquire after my iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and search after my sin? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_7">7&#160;</span>Although you know that I am not wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>there is no one who can deliver out of your hand. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘Your hands have framed me and fashioned me altogether, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet you destroy me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_9">9&#160;</span>Remember, I beg you, that you have fashioned me as clay. </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you bring me into dust again? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_10">10&#160;</span>Haven’t you poured me out like milk, </div>
<div class='q2'>and curdled me like cheese? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_11">11&#160;</span>You have clothed me with skin and flesh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and knit me together with bones and sinews. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_12">12&#160;</span>You have granted me life and loving kindness. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your visitation has preserved my spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_13">13&#160;</span>Yet you hid these things in your heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>I know that this is with you: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_14">14&#160;</span>if I sin, then you mark me. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will not acquit me from my iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_15">15&#160;</span>If I am wicked, woe to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>If I am righteous, I still will not lift up my head, </div>
<div class='q2'>being filled with disgrace, </div>
<div class='q2'>and conscious of my affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_16">16&#160;</span>If my head is held high, you hunt me like a lion. </div>
<div class='q2'>Again you show yourself powerful to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_17">17&#160;</span>You renew your witnesses against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and increase your indignation on me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Changes and warfare are with me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘Why, then, have you brought me out of the womb? </div>
<div class='q2'>I wish I had given up the spirit, and no eye had seen me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_19">19&#160;</span>I should have been as though I had not been. </div>
<div class='q2'>I should have been carried from the womb to the grave. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_20">20&#160;</span>Aren’t my days few? </div>
<div class='q2'>Stop! </div>
<div class='q'>Leave me alone, that I may find a little comfort, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_21">21&#160;</span>before I go where I will not return from, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB10_22">22&#160;</span>the land dark as midnight, </div>
<div class='q2'>of the shadow of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>without any order, </div>
<div class='q2'>where the light is as midnight.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_1">1&#160;</span>Then Zophar, the Naamathite, answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_2">2&#160;</span>“Shouldn’t the multitude of words be answered? </div>
<div class='q2'>Should a man full of talk be justified? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_3">3&#160;</span>Should your boastings make men hold their peace? </div>
<div class='q2'>When you mock, will no man make you ashamed? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_4">4&#160;</span>For you say, ‘My doctrine is pure. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am clean in your eyes.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_5">5&#160;</span>But oh that God would speak, </div>
<div class='q2'>and open his lips against you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_6">6&#160;</span>that he would show you the secrets of wisdom! </div>
<div class='q2'>For true wisdom has two sides. </div>
<div class='q2'>Know therefore that God exacts of you less than your iniquity deserves. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_7">7&#160;</span>“Can you fathom the mystery of God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or can you probe the limits of the Almighty? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_8">8&#160;</span>They are high as heaven. What can you do? </div>
<div class='q2'>They are deeper than Sheol.<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> What can you know? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_9">9&#160;</span>Its measure is longer than the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and broader than the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_10">10&#160;</span>If he passes by, or confines, </div>
<div class='q2'>or convenes a court, then who can oppose him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_11">11&#160;</span>For he knows false men. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sees iniquity also, even though he doesn’t consider it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_12">12&#160;</span>An empty-headed man becomes wise </div>
<div class='q2'>when a man is born as a wild donkey’s colt. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_13">13&#160;</span>“If you set your heart aright, </div>
<div class='q2'>stretch out your hands toward him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_14">14&#160;</span>If iniquity is in your hand, put it far away. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let unrighteousness dwell in your tents. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_15">15&#160;</span>Surely then you will lift up your face without spot. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, you will be steadfast, and will not fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_16">16&#160;</span>for you will forget your misery. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will remember it like waters that have passed away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_17">17&#160;</span>Life will be clearer than the noonday. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though there is darkness, it will be as the morning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_18">18&#160;</span>You will be secure, because there is hope. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, you will search, and will take your rest in safety. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_19">19&#160;</span>Also you will lie down, and no one will make you afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, many will court your favor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB11_20">20&#160;</span>But the eyes of the wicked will fail. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will have no way to flee. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their hope will be the giving up of the spirit.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_2">2&#160;</span>“No doubt, but you are the people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wisdom will die with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_3">3&#160;</span>But I have understanding as well as you; </div>
<div class='q2'>I am not inferior to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, who doesn’t know such things as these? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_4">4&#160;</span>I am like one who is a joke to his neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>I, who called on God, and he answered. </div>
<div class='q2'>The just, the blameless man is a joke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_5">5&#160;</span>In the thought of him who is at ease there is contempt for misfortune. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is ready for them whose foot slips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_6">6&#160;</span>The tents of robbers prosper. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who provoke God are secure, </div>
<div class='q2'>who carry their god in their hands. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_7">7&#160;</span>“But ask the animals now, and they will teach you; </div>
<div class='q2'>the birds of the sky, and they will tell you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_8">8&#160;</span>Or speak to the earth, and it will teach you. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fish of the sea will declare to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_9">9&#160;</span>Who doesn’t know that in all these, </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh’s hand has done this, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_10">10&#160;</span>in whose hand is the life of every living thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the breath of all mankind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_11">11&#160;</span>Doesn’t the ear try words, </div>
<div class='q2'>even as the palate tastes its food? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_12">12&#160;</span>With aged men is wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>in length of days understanding. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_13">13&#160;</span>“With God is wisdom and might. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has counsel and understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, he breaks down, and it can’t be built again. </div>
<div class='q2'>He imprisons a man, and there can be no release. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, he withholds the waters, and they dry up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Again, he sends them out, and they overturn the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_16">16&#160;</span>With him is strength and wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The deceived and the deceiver are his. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_17">17&#160;</span>He leads counselors away stripped. </div>
<div class='q2'>He makes judges fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_18">18&#160;</span>He loosens the bond of kings. </div>
<div class='q2'>He binds their waist with a belt. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_19">19&#160;</span>He leads priests away stripped, </div>
<div class='q2'>and overthrows the mighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_20">20&#160;</span>He removes the speech of those who are trusted, </div>
<div class='q2'>and takes away the understanding of the elders. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_21">21&#160;</span>He pours contempt on princes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and loosens the belt of the strong. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_22">22&#160;</span>He uncovers deep things out of darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings out to light the shadow of death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_23">23&#160;</span>He increases the nations, and he destroys them. </div>
<div class='q2'>He enlarges the nations, and he leads them captive. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_24">24&#160;</span>He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB12_25">25&#160;</span>They grope in the dark without light. </div>
<div class='q2'>He makes them stagger like a drunken man. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB13_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 13</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_1">1&#160;</span>“Behold, my eye has seen all this. </div>
<div class='q2'>My ear has heard and understood it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_2">2&#160;</span>What you know, I know also. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am not inferior to you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_3">3&#160;</span>“Surely I would speak to the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q2'>I desire to reason with God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_4">4&#160;</span>But you are forgers of lies. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are all physicians of no value. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_5">5&#160;</span>Oh that you would be completely silent! </div>
<div class='q2'>Then you would be wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_6">6&#160;</span>Hear now my reasoning. </div>
<div class='q2'>Listen to the pleadings of my lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_7">7&#160;</span>Will you speak unrighteously for God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and talk deceitfully for him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_8">8&#160;</span>Will you show partiality to him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you contend for God? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_9">9&#160;</span>Is it good that he should search you out? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or as one deceives a man, will you deceive him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_10">10&#160;</span>He will surely reprove you </div>
<div class='q2'>if you secretly show partiality. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_11">11&#160;</span>Won’t his majesty make you afraid </div>
<div class='q2'>and his dread fall on you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_12">12&#160;</span>Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your defenses are defenses of clay. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_13">13&#160;</span>“Be silent! </div>
<div class='q2'>Leave me alone, that I may speak. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let come on me what will. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_14">14&#160;</span>Why should I take my flesh in my teeth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and put my life in my hand? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, he will kill me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have no hope. </div>
<div class='q2'>Nevertheless, I will maintain my ways before him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_16">16&#160;</span>This also will be my salvation, </div>
<div class='q2'>that a godless man will not come before him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_17">17&#160;</span>Listen carefully to my speech. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let my declaration be in your ears. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_18">18&#160;</span>See now, I have set my cause in order. </div>
<div class='q2'>I know that I am righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_19">19&#160;</span>Who is he who will contend with me? </div>
<div class='q2'>For then would I hold my peace and give up the spirit. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_20">20&#160;</span>“Only don’t do two things to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>then I will not hide myself from your face: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_21">21&#160;</span>withdraw your hand far from me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t let your terror make me afraid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_22">22&#160;</span>Then call, and I will answer, </div>
<div class='q2'>or let me speak, and you answer me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_23">23&#160;</span>How many are my iniquities and sins? </div>
<div class='q2'>Make me know my disobedience and my sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_24">24&#160;</span>Why do you hide your face, </div>
<div class='q2'>and consider me your enemy? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_25">25&#160;</span>Will you harass a driven leaf? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you pursue the dry stubble? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_26">26&#160;</span>For you write bitter things against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make me inherit the iniquities of my youth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_27">27&#160;</span>You also put my feet in the stocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and mark all my paths. </div>
<div class='q2'>You set a bound to the soles of my feet, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB13_28">28&#160;</span>though I am decaying like a rotten thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a garment that is moth-eaten. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB14_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 14</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_1">1&#160;</span>“Man, who is born of a woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>is of few days, and full of trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_2">2&#160;</span>He grows up like a flower, and is cut down. </div>
<div class='q2'>He also flees like a shadow, and doesn’t continue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_3">3&#160;</span>Do you open your eyes on such a one, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bring me into judgment with you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_4">4&#160;</span>Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? </div>
<div class='q2'>Not one. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_5">5&#160;</span>Seeing his days are determined, </div>
<div class='q2'>the number of his months is with you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you have appointed his bounds that he can’t pass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_6">6&#160;</span>Look away from him, that he may rest, </div>
<div class='q2'>until he accomplishes, as a hireling, his day. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_7">7&#160;</span>“For there is hope for a tree if it is cut down, </div>
<div class='q2'>that it will sprout again, </div>
<div class='q2'>that the tender branch of it will not cease. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_8">8&#160;</span>Though its root grows old in the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its stock dies in the ground, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_9">9&#160;</span>yet through the scent of water it will bud, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sprout boughs like a plant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_10">10&#160;</span>But man dies, and is laid low. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, man gives up the spirit, and where is he? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_11">11&#160;</span>As the waters fail from the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the river wastes and dries up, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_12">12&#160;</span>so man lies down and doesn’t rise. </div>
<div class='q2'>Until the heavens are no more, they will not awake, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor be roused out of their sleep. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_13">13&#160;</span>“Oh that you would hide me in Sheol,<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>that you would keep me secret until your wrath is past, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you would appoint me a set time and remember me! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_14">14&#160;</span>If a man dies, will he live again? </div>
<div class='q2'>I would wait all the days of my warfare, </div>
<div class='q2'>until my release should come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_15">15&#160;</span>You would call, and I would answer you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You would have a desire for the work of your hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_16">16&#160;</span>But now you count my steps. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t you watch over my sin? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_17">17&#160;</span>My disobedience is sealed up in a bag. </div>
<div class='q2'>You fasten up my iniquity. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_18">18&#160;</span>“But the mountain falling comes to nothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>The rock is removed out of its place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_19">19&#160;</span>The waters wear the stones. </div>
<div class='q2'>The torrents of it wash away the dust of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>So you destroy the hope of man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_20">20&#160;</span>You forever prevail against him, and he departs. </div>
<div class='q2'>You change his face, and send him away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_21">21&#160;</span>His sons come to honor, and he doesn’t know it. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are brought low, but he doesn’t perceive it of them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB14_22">22&#160;</span>But his flesh on him has pain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his soul within him mourns.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_1">1&#160;</span>Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_2">2&#160;</span>“Should a wise man answer with vain knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fill himself with the east wind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_3">3&#160;</span>Should he reason with unprofitable talk, </div>
<div class='q2'>or with speeches with which he can do no good? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_4">4&#160;</span>Yes, you do away with fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hinder devotion before God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_5">5&#160;</span>For your iniquity teaches your mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you choose the language of the crafty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_6">6&#160;</span>Your own mouth condemns you, and not I. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, your own lips testify against you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_7">7&#160;</span>“Are you the first man who was born? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or were you brought out before the hills? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_8">8&#160;</span>Have you heard the secret counsel of God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Do you limit wisdom to yourself? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_9">9&#160;</span>What do you know that we don’t know? </div>
<div class='q2'>What do you understand which is not in us? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_10">10&#160;</span>With us are both the gray-headed and the very aged men, </div>
<div class='q2'>much older than your father. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_11">11&#160;</span>Are the consolations of God too small for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the word that is gentle toward you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_12">12&#160;</span>Why does your heart carry you away? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why do your eyes flash, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_13">13&#160;</span>that you turn your spirit against God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let such words go out of your mouth? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_14">14&#160;</span>What is man, that he should be clean? </div>
<div class='q2'>What is he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_15">15&#160;</span>Behold, he puts no trust in his holy ones. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, the heavens are not clean in his sight; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_16">16&#160;</span>how much less one who is abominable and corrupt, </div>
<div class='q2'>a man who drinks iniquity like water! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_17">17&#160;</span>“I will show you, listen to me; </div>
<div class='q2'>that which I have seen I will declare </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_18">18&#160;</span>(which wise men have told by their fathers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have not hidden it; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_19">19&#160;</span>to whom alone the land was given, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no stranger passed among them): </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_20">20&#160;</span>the wicked man writhes in pain all his days, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the number of years that are laid up for the oppressor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_21">21&#160;</span>A sound of terrors is in his ears. </div>
<div class='q2'>In prosperity the destroyer will come on him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_22">22&#160;</span>He doesn’t believe that he will return out of darkness. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is waited for by the sword. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_23">23&#160;</span>He wanders abroad for bread, saying, ‘Where is it?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>He knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_24">24&#160;</span>Distress and anguish make him afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>They prevail against him, as a king ready to the battle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_25">25&#160;</span>Because he has stretched out his hand against God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and behaves himself proudly against the Almighty, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_26">26&#160;</span>he runs at him with a stiff neck, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the thick shields of his bucklers, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_27">27&#160;</span>because he has covered his face with his fatness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gathered fat on his thighs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_28">28&#160;</span>He has lived in desolate cities, </div>
<div class='q2'>in houses which no one inhabited, </div>
<div class='q2'>which were ready to become heaps. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_29">29&#160;</span>He will not be rich, neither will his substance continue, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will their possessions be extended on the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_30">30&#160;</span>He will not depart out of darkness. </div>
<div class='q2'>The flame will dry up his branches. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will go away by the breath of God’s mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_31">31&#160;</span>Let him not trust in emptiness, deceiving himself, </div>
<div class='q2'>for emptiness will be his reward. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_32">32&#160;</span>It will be accomplished before his time. </div>
<div class='q2'>His branch will not be green. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_33">33&#160;</span>He will shake off his unripe grape as the vine, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will cast off his flower as the olive tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_34">34&#160;</span>For the company of the godless will be barren, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fire will consume the tents of bribery. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB15_35">35&#160;</span>They conceive mischief and produce iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their heart prepares deceit.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_2">2&#160;</span>“I have heard many such things. </div>
<div class='q2'>You are all miserable comforters! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_3">3&#160;</span>Shall vain words have an end? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or what provokes you that you answer? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_4">4&#160;</span>I also could speak as you do. </div>
<div class='q2'>If your soul were in my soul’s place, </div>
<div class='q2'>I could join words together against you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shake my head at you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_5">5&#160;</span>but I would strengthen you with my mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>The solace of my lips would relieve you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_6">6&#160;</span>“Though I speak, my grief is not subsided. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though I forbear, what am I eased? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_7">7&#160;</span>But now, God, you have surely worn me out. </div>
<div class='q2'>You have made all my company desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_8">8&#160;</span>You have shriveled me up. This is a witness against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My leanness rises up against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>It testifies to my face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_9">9&#160;</span>He has torn me in his wrath and persecuted me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has gnashed on me with his teeth. </div>
<div class='q2'>My adversary sharpens his eyes on me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_10">10&#160;</span>They have gaped on me with their mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>They have struck me on the cheek reproachfully. </div>
<div class='q2'>They gather themselves together against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_11">11&#160;</span>God delivers me to the ungodly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and casts me into the hands of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_12">12&#160;</span>I was at ease, and he broke me apart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he has taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has also set me up for his target. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_13">13&#160;</span>His archers surround me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He splits my kidneys apart, and does not spare. </div>
<div class='q2'>He pours out my bile on the ground. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_14">14&#160;</span>He breaks me with breach on breach. </div>
<div class='q2'>He runs at me like a giant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_15">15&#160;</span>I have sewed sackcloth on my skin, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have thrust my horn in the dust. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_16">16&#160;</span>My face is red with weeping. </div>
<div class='q2'>Deep darkness is on my eyelids, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_17">17&#160;</span>although there is no violence in my hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my prayer is pure. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_18">18&#160;</span>“Earth, don’t cover my blood. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let my cry have no place to rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_19">19&#160;</span>Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who vouches for me is on high. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_20">20&#160;</span>My friends scoff at me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My eyes pour out tears to God, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_21">21&#160;</span>that he would maintain the right of a man with God, </div>
<div class='q2'>of a son of man with his neighbor! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB16_22">22&#160;</span>For when a few years have come, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will go the way of no return. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_1">1&#160;</span>“My spirit is consumed. </div>
<div class='q2'>My days are extinct </div>
<div class='q2'>and the grave is ready for me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_2">2&#160;</span>Surely there are mockers with me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My eye dwells on their provocation. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_3">3&#160;</span>“Now give a pledge. Be collateral for me with yourself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is there who will strike hands with me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_4">4&#160;</span>For you have hidden their heart from understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore you will not exalt them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_5">5&#160;</span>He who denounces his friends for plunder, </div>
<div class='q2'>even the eyes of his children will fail. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_6">6&#160;</span>“But he has made me a byword of the people. </div>
<div class='q2'>They spit in my face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_7">7&#160;</span>My eye also is dim by reason of sorrow. </div>
<div class='q2'>All my members are as a shadow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_8">8&#160;</span>Upright men will be astonished at this. </div>
<div class='q2'>The innocent will stir himself up against the godless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_9">9&#160;</span>Yet the righteous will hold to his way. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who has clean hands will grow stronger and stronger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_10">10&#160;</span>But as for you all, come back. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will not find a wise man among you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_11">11&#160;</span>My days are past. </div>
<div class='q2'>My plans are broken off, </div>
<div class='q2'>as are the thoughts of my heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_12">12&#160;</span>They change the night into day, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying ‘The light is near’ in the presence of darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_13">13&#160;</span>If I look for Sheol<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> as my house, </div>
<div class='q2'>if I have spread my couch in the darkness, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_14">14&#160;</span>if I have said to corruption, ‘You are my father,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the worm, ‘My mother,’ and ‘My sister,’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_15">15&#160;</span>where then is my hope? </div>
<div class='q2'>As for my hope, who will see it? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB17_16">16&#160;</span>Shall it go down with me to the gates of Sheol,<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>or descend together into the dust?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_1">1&#160;</span>Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_2">2&#160;</span>“How long will you hunt for words? </div>
<div class='q2'>Consider, and afterwards we will speak. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_3">3&#160;</span>Why are we counted as animals, </div>
<div class='q2'>which have become unclean in your sight? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_4">4&#160;</span>You who tear yourself in your anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>will the earth be forsaken for you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or will the rock be removed out of its place? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_5">5&#160;</span>“Yes, the light of the wicked will be put out. </div>
<div class='q2'>The spark of his fire won’t shine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_6">6&#160;</span>The light will be dark in his tent. </div>
<div class='q2'>His lamp above him will be put out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_7">7&#160;</span>The steps of his strength will be shortened. </div>
<div class='q2'>His own counsel will cast him down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_8">8&#160;</span>For he is cast into a net by his own feet, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he wanders into its mesh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_9">9&#160;</span>A snare will take him by the heel. </div>
<div class='q2'>A trap will catch him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_10">10&#160;</span>A noose is hidden for him in the ground, </div>
<div class='q2'>a trap for him on the path. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_11">11&#160;</span>Terrors will make him afraid on every side, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will chase him at his heels. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_12">12&#160;</span>His strength will be famished. </div>
<div class='q2'>Calamity will be ready at his side. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_13">13&#160;</span>The members of his body will be devoured. </div>
<div class='q2'>The firstborn of death will devour his members. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_14">14&#160;</span>He will be rooted out of the security of his tent. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be brought to the king of terrors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_15">15&#160;</span>There will dwell in his tent that which is none of his. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sulfur will be scattered on his habitation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_16">16&#160;</span>His roots will be dried up beneath. </div>
<div class='q2'>His branch will be cut off above. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_17">17&#160;</span>His memory will perish from the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will have no name in the street. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_18">18&#160;</span>He will be driven from light into darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and chased out of the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_19">19&#160;</span>He will have neither son nor grandson among his people, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor any remaining where he lived. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_20">20&#160;</span>Those who come after will be astonished at his day, </div>
<div class='q2'>as those who went before were frightened. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB18_21">21&#160;</span>Surely such are the dwellings of the unrighteous. </div>
<div class='q2'>This is the place of him who doesn’t know God.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_2">2&#160;</span>“How long will you torment me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and crush me with words? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_3">3&#160;</span>You have reproached me ten times. </div>
<div class='q2'>You aren’t ashamed that you attack me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_4">4&#160;</span>If it is true that I have erred, </div>
<div class='q2'>my error remains with myself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_5">5&#160;</span>If indeed you will magnify yourselves against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and plead against me my reproach, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_6">6&#160;</span>know now that God has subverted me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has surrounded me with his net. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_7">7&#160;</span>“Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. </div>
<div class='q2'>I cry for help, but there is no justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_8">8&#160;</span>He has walled up my way so that I can’t pass, </div>
<div class='q2'>and has set darkness in my paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_9">9&#160;</span>He has stripped me of my glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>and taken the crown from my head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_10">10&#160;</span>He has broken me down on every side, and I am gone. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has plucked my hope up like a tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_11">11&#160;</span>He has also kindled his wrath against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He counts me among his adversaries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_12">12&#160;</span>His troops come on together, </div>
<div class='q2'>build a siege ramp against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and encamp around my tent. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_13">13&#160;</span>“He has put my brothers far from me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My acquaintances are wholly estranged from me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_14">14&#160;</span>My relatives have gone away. </div>
<div class='q2'>My familiar friends have forgotten me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_15">15&#160;</span>Those who dwell in my house and my maids consider me a stranger. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am an alien in their sight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_16">16&#160;</span>I call to my servant, and he gives me no answer. </div>
<div class='q2'>I beg him with my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_17">17&#160;</span>My breath is offensive to my wife. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am loathsome to the children of my own mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_18">18&#160;</span>Even young children despise me. </div>
<div class='q2'>If I arise, they speak against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_19">19&#160;</span>All my familiar friends abhor me. </div>
<div class='q2'>They whom I loved have turned against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_20">20&#160;</span>My bones stick to my skin and to my flesh. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have escaped by the skin of my teeth. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_21">21&#160;</span>“Have pity on me. Have pity on me, you my friends, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the hand of God has touched me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_22">22&#160;</span>Why do you persecute me as God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are not satisfied with my flesh? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_23">23&#160;</span>“Oh that my words were now written! </div>
<div class='q2'>Oh that they were inscribed in a book! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_24">24&#160;</span>That with an iron pen and lead </div>
<div class='q2'>they were engraved in the rock forever! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_25">25&#160;</span>But as for me, I know that my Redeemer lives. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the end, he will stand upon the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_26">26&#160;</span>After my skin is destroyed, </div>
<div class='q2'>then I will see God in my flesh, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_27">27&#160;</span>whom I, even I, will see on my side. </div>
<div class='q2'>My eyes will see, and not as a stranger. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“My heart is consumed within me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_28">28&#160;</span>If you say, ‘How we will persecute him!’ </div>
<div class='q2'>because the root of the matter is found in me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB19_29">29&#160;</span>be afraid of the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>for wrath brings the punishments of the sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may know there is a judgment.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_1">1&#160;</span>Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_2">2&#160;</span>“Therefore my thoughts answer me, </div>
<div class='q2'>even by reason of my haste that is in me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_3">3&#160;</span>I have heard the reproof which puts me to shame. </div>
<div class='q2'>The spirit of my understanding answers me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t you know this from old time, </div>
<div class='q2'>since man was placed on earth, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_5">5&#160;</span>that the triumphing of the wicked is short, </div>
<div class='q2'>the joy of the godless but for a moment? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_6">6&#160;</span>Though his height mount up to the heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his head reach to the clouds, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_7">7&#160;</span>yet he will perish forever like his own dung. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who have seen him will say, ‘Where is he?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_8">8&#160;</span>He will fly away as a dream, and will not be found. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he will be chased away like a vision of the night. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_9">9&#160;</span>The eye which saw him will see him no more, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will his place see him any more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_10">10&#160;</span>His children will seek the favor of the poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>His hands will give back his wealth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_11">11&#160;</span>His bones are full of his youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>but youth will lie down with him in the dust. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_12">12&#160;</span>“Though wickedness is sweet in his mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>though he hide it under his tongue, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_13">13&#160;</span>though he spare it, and will not let it go, </div>
<div class='q2'>but keep it still within his mouth, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_14">14&#160;</span>yet his food in his bowels is turned. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is cobra venom within him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_15">15&#160;</span>He has swallowed down riches, and he will vomit them up again. </div>
<div class='q2'>God will cast them out of his belly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_16">16&#160;</span>He will suck cobra venom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The viper’s tongue will kill him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_17">17&#160;</span>He will not look at the rivers, </div>
<div class='q2'>the flowing streams of honey and butter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_18">18&#160;</span> He will restore that for which he labored, and will not swallow it down. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will not rejoice according to the substance that he has gotten. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_19">19&#160;</span>For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has violently taken away a house, and he will not build it up. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_20">20&#160;</span>“Because he knew no quietness within him, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will not save anything of that in which he delights. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_21">21&#160;</span>There was nothing left that he didn’t devour, </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore his prosperity will not endure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_22">22&#160;</span>In the fullness of his sufficiency, distress will overtake him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The hand of everyone who is in misery will come on him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_23">23&#160;</span>When he is about to fill his belly, God will cast the fierceness of his wrath on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will rain on him while he is eating. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_24">24&#160;</span>He will flee from the iron weapon. </div>
<div class='q2'>The bronze arrow will strike him through. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_25">25&#160;</span>He draws it out, and it comes out of his body. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, the glittering point comes out of his liver. </div>
<div class='q2'>Terrors are on him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_26">26&#160;</span>All darkness is laid up for his treasures. </div>
<div class='q2'>An unfanned fire will devour him. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will consume that which is left in his tent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_27">27&#160;</span>The heavens will reveal his iniquity. </div>
<div class='q2'>The earth will rise up against him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_28">28&#160;</span>The increase of his house will depart. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will rush away in the day of his wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB20_29">29&#160;</span>This is the portion of a wicked man from God, </div>
<div class='q2'>the heritage appointed to him by God.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_2">2&#160;</span>“Listen diligently to my speech. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let this be your consolation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_3">3&#160;</span>Allow me, and I also will speak. </div>
<div class='q2'>After I have spoken, mock on. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_4">4&#160;</span>As for me, is my complaint to man? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why shouldn’t I be impatient? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_5">5&#160;</span>Look at me, and be astonished. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lay your hand on your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_6">6&#160;</span>When I remember, I am troubled. </div>
<div class='q2'>Horror takes hold of my flesh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_7">7&#160;</span>“Why do the wicked live, </div>
<div class='q2'>become old, yes, and grow mighty in power? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_8">8&#160;</span>Their child is established with them in their sight, </div>
<div class='q2'>their offspring before their eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_9">9&#160;</span>Their houses are safe from fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither is the rod of God upon them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_10">10&#160;</span>Their bulls breed without fail. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their cows calve, and don’t miscarry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_11">11&#160;</span>They send out their little ones like a flock. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their children dance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_12">12&#160;</span>They sing to the tambourine and harp, </div>
<div class='q2'>and rejoice at the sound of the pipe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_13">13&#160;</span>They spend their days in prosperity. </div>
<div class='q2'>In an instant they go down to Sheol.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_14">14&#160;</span>They tell God, ‘Depart from us, </div>
<div class='q2'>for we don’t want to know about your ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_15">15&#160;</span>What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? </div>
<div class='q2'>What profit should we have, if we pray to him?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_16">16&#160;</span>Behold, their prosperity is not in their hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>The counsel of the wicked is far from me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_17">17&#160;</span>“How often is it that the lamp of the wicked is put out, </div>
<div class='q2'>that their calamity comes on them, </div>
<div class='q2'>that God distributes sorrows in his anger? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_18">18&#160;</span>How often is it that they are as stubble before the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>as chaff that the storm carries away? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_19">19&#160;</span>You say, ‘God lays up his iniquity for his children.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>Let him recompense it to himself, that he may know it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_20">20&#160;</span>Let his own eyes see his destruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_21">21&#160;</span>For what does he care for his house after him, </div>
<div class='q2'>when the number of his months is cut off? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_22">22&#160;</span>“Shall any teach God knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>since he judges those who are high? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_23">23&#160;</span>One dies in his full strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>being wholly at ease and quiet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_24">24&#160;</span>His pails are full of milk. </div>
<div class='q2'>The marrow of his bones is moistened. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_25">25&#160;</span>Another dies in bitterness of soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and never tastes of good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_26">26&#160;</span>They lie down alike in the dust. </div>
<div class='q2'>The worm covers them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_27">27&#160;</span>“Behold, I know your thoughts, </div>
<div class='q2'>the plans with which you would wrong me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_28">28&#160;</span>For you say, ‘Where is the house of the prince? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is the tent in which the wicked lived?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_29">29&#160;</span>Haven’t you asked wayfaring men? </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t you know their evidences, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_30">30&#160;</span>that the evil man is reserved to the day of calamity, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they are led out to the day of wrath? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_31">31&#160;</span>Who will declare his way to his face? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will repay him what he has done? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_32">32&#160;</span>Yet he will be borne to the grave. </div>
<div class='q2'>Men will keep watch over the tomb. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_33">33&#160;</span>The clods of the valley will be sweet to him. </div>
<div class='q2'>All men will draw after him, </div>
<div class='q2'>as there were innumerable before him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB21_34">34&#160;</span>So how can you comfort me with nonsense, </div>
<div class='q2'>because in your answers there remains only falsehood?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_1">1&#160;</span>Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_2">2&#160;</span>“Can a man be profitable to God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Surely he who is wise is profitable to himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_3">3&#160;</span>Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that you are righteous? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or does it benefit him that you make your ways perfect? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_4">4&#160;</span>Is it for your piety that he reproves you, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he enters with you into judgment? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_5">5&#160;</span>Isn’t your wickedness great? </div>
<div class='q2'>Neither is there any end to your iniquities. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_6">6&#160;</span>For you have taken pledges from your brother for nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stripped the naked of their clothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_7">7&#160;</span>You haven’t given water to the weary to drink, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you have withheld bread from the hungry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_8">8&#160;</span>But as for the mighty man, he had the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>The honorable man, he lived in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_9">9&#160;</span>You have sent widows away empty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the arms of the fatherless have been broken. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore snares are around you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sudden fear troubles you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_11">11&#160;</span>or darkness, so that you can not see, </div>
<div class='q2'>and floods of waters cover you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_12">12&#160;</span>“Isn’t God in the heights of heaven? </div>
<div class='q2'>See the height of the stars, how high they are! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_13">13&#160;</span>You say, ‘What does God know? </div>
<div class='q2'>Can he judge through the thick darkness? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_14">14&#160;</span>Thick clouds are a covering to him, so that he doesn’t see. </div>
<div class='q2'>He walks on the vault of the sky.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_15">15&#160;</span>Will you keep the old way, </div>
<div class='q2'>which wicked men have trodden, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_16">16&#160;</span>who were snatched away before their time, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose foundation was poured out as a stream, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_17">17&#160;</span>who said to God, ‘Depart from us!’ </div>
<div class='q2'>and, ‘What can the Almighty do for us?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_18">18&#160;</span>Yet he filled their houses with good things, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the counsel of the wicked is far from me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_19">19&#160;</span>The righteous see it, and are glad. </div>
<div class='q2'>The innocent ridicule them, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_20">20&#160;</span>saying, ‘Surely those who rose up against us are cut off. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fire has consumed their remnant.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_21">21&#160;</span>“Acquaint yourself with him now, and be at peace. </div>
<div class='q2'>By it, good will come to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_22">22&#160;</span>Please receive instruction from his mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lay up his words in your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_23">23&#160;</span>If you return to the Almighty, you will be built up, </div>
<div class='q2'>if you put away unrighteousness far from your tents. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_24">24&#160;</span>Lay your treasure in the dust, </div>
<div class='q2'>the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_25">25&#160;</span>The Almighty will be your treasure, </div>
<div class='q2'>and precious silver to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_26">26&#160;</span>For then you will delight yourself in the Almighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will lift up your face to God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_27">27&#160;</span>You will make your prayer to him, and he will hear you. </div>
<div class='q2'>You will pay your vows. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_28">28&#160;</span>You will also decree a thing, and it will be established to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Light will shine on your ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_29">29&#160;</span>When they cast down, you will say, ‘be lifted up.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>He will save the humble person. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB22_30">30&#160;</span>He will even deliver him who is not innocent. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he will be delivered through the cleanness of your hands.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_2">2&#160;</span>“Even today my complaint is rebellious. </div>
<div class='q2'>His hand is heavy in spite of my groaning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_3">3&#160;</span>Oh that I knew where I might find him! </div>
<div class='q2'>That I might come even to his seat! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_4">4&#160;</span>I would set my cause in order before him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fill my mouth with arguments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_5">5&#160;</span>I would know the words which he would answer me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and understand what he would tell me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_6">6&#160;</span>Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power? </div>
<div class='q2'>No, but he would listen to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_7">7&#160;</span>There the upright might reason with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>so I should be delivered forever from my judge. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_8">8&#160;</span>“If I go east, he is not there. </div>
<div class='q2'>If I go west, I can’t find him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_9">9&#160;</span>He works to the north, but I can’t see him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He turns south, but I can’t catch a glimpse of him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_10">10&#160;</span>But he knows the way that I take. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he has tried me, I will come out like gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_11">11&#160;</span>My foot has held fast to his steps. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have kept his way, and not turned away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_12">12&#160;</span>I haven’t gone back from the commandment of his lips. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have treasured up the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_13">13&#160;</span>But he stands alone, and who can oppose him? </div>
<div class='q2'>What his soul desires, even that he does. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_14">14&#160;</span>For he performs that which is appointed for me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Many such things are with him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore I am terrified at his presence. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I consider, I am afraid of him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_16">16&#160;</span>For God has made my heart faint. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Almighty has terrified me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB23_17">17&#160;</span>Because I was not cut off before the darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither did he cover the thick darkness from my face. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB24_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 24</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_1">1&#160;</span>“Why aren’t times laid up by the Almighty? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why don’t those who know him see his days? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_2">2&#160;</span>There are people who remove the landmarks. </div>
<div class='q2'>They violently take away flocks, and feed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_3">3&#160;</span>They drive away the donkey of the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they take the widow’s ox for a pledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_4">4&#160;</span>They turn the needy out of the way. </div>
<div class='q2'>The poor of the earth all hide themselves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert, </div>
<div class='q2'>they go out to their work, seeking diligently for food. </div>
<div class='q'>The wilderness yields them bread for their children. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_6">6&#160;</span>They cut their food in the field. </div>
<div class='q'>They glean the vineyard of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_7">7&#160;</span>They lie all night naked without clothing, </div>
<div class='q'>and have no covering in the cold. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_8">8&#160;</span>They are wet with the showers of the mountains, </div>
<div class='q'>and embrace the rock for lack of a shelter. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_9">9&#160;</span>There are those who pluck the fatherless from the breast, </div>
<div class='q'>and take a pledge of the poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_10">10&#160;</span>so that they go around naked without clothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>Being hungry, they carry the sheaves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_11">11&#160;</span>They make oil within the walls of these men. </div>
<div class='q2'>They tread wine presses, and suffer thirst. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_12">12&#160;</span>From out of the populous city, men groan. </div>
<div class='q2'>The soul of the wounded cries out, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet God doesn’t regard the folly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_13">13&#160;</span>“These are of those who rebel against the light. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t know its ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor stay in its paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_14">14&#160;</span>The murderer rises with the light. </div>
<div class='q2'>He kills the poor and needy. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the night he is like a thief. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_15">15&#160;</span>The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, </div>
<div class='q2'>saying, ‘No eye will see me.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>He disguises his face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_16">16&#160;</span>In the dark they dig through houses. </div>
<div class='q2'>They shut themselves up in the daytime. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t know the light. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_17">17&#160;</span>For the morning is to all of them like thick darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they know the terrors of the thick darkness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_18">18&#160;</span>“They are foam on the surface of the waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their portion is cursed in the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t turn into the way of the vineyards. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_19">19&#160;</span>Drought and heat consume the snow waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>so does Sheol<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> those who have sinned. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_20">20&#160;</span>The womb will forget him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The worm will feed sweetly on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be no more remembered. </div>
<div class='q2'>Unrighteousness will be broken as a tree. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_21">21&#160;</span>He devours the barren who don’t bear. </div>
<div class='q2'>He shows no kindness to the widow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_22">22&#160;</span>Yet God preserves the mighty by his power. </div>
<div class='q2'>He rises up who has no assurance of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_23">23&#160;</span>God gives them security, and they rest in it. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eyes are on their ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_24">24&#160;</span>They are exalted; yet a little while, and they are gone. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, they are brought low, they are taken out of the way as all others, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB24_25">25&#160;</span>If it isn’t so now, who will prove me a liar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make my speech worth nothing?” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_1">1&#160;</span>Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_2">2&#160;</span>“Dominion and fear are with him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He makes peace in his high places. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_3">3&#160;</span>Can his armies be counted? </div>
<div class='q2'>On whom does his light not arise? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_4">4&#160;</span>How then can man be just with God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or how can he who is born of a woman be clean? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_5">5&#160;</span>Behold, even the moon has no brightness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the stars are not pure in his sight; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB25_6">6&#160;</span>How much less man, who is a worm, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the son of man, who is a worm!”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_2">2&#160;</span>“How have you helped him who is without power! </div>
<div class='q2'>How have you saved the arm that has no strength! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_3">3&#160;</span>How have you counseled him who has no wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and plentifully declared sound knowledge! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_4">4&#160;</span>To whom have you uttered words? </div>
<div class='q2'>Whose spirit came out of you? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_5">5&#160;</span>“The departed spirits tremble, </div>
<div class='q2'>those beneath the waters and all that live in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_6">6&#160;</span>Sheol<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> is naked before God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Abaddon<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> has no covering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_7">7&#160;</span>He stretches out the north over empty space, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hangs the earth on nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_8">8&#160;</span>He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the cloud is not burst under them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_9">9&#160;</span>He encloses the face of his throne, </div>
<div class='q2'>and spreads his cloud on it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_10">10&#160;</span>He has described a boundary on the surface of the waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the confines of light and darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_11">11&#160;</span>The pillars of heaven tremble </div>
<div class='q2'>and are astonished at his rebuke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_12">12&#160;</span>He stirs up the sea with his power, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by his understanding he strikes through Rahab. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_13">13&#160;</span>By his Spirit the heavens are garnished. </div>
<div class='q2'>His hand has pierced the swift serpent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB26_14">14&#160;</span>Behold, these are but the outskirts of his ways. </div>
<div class='q2'>How small a whisper do we hear of him! </div>
<div class='q2'>But the thunder of his power who can understand?”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_1">1&#160;</span>Job again took up his parable, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_2">2&#160;</span>“As God lives, who has taken away my right, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Almighty, who has made my soul bitter </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_3">3&#160;</span>(for the length of my life is still in me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the spirit of God is in my nostrils); </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_4">4&#160;</span>surely my lips will not speak unrighteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will my tongue utter deceit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_5">5&#160;</span>Far be it from me that I should justify you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Until I die I will not put away my integrity from me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_6">6&#160;</span>I hold fast to my righteousness, and will not let it go. </div>
<div class='q2'>My heart will not reproach me so long as I live. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_7">7&#160;</span>“Let my enemy be as the wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let him who rises up against me be as the unrighteous. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_8">8&#160;</span>For what is the hope of the godless, when he is cut off, </div>
<div class='q2'>when God takes away his life? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_9">9&#160;</span>Will God hear his cry when trouble comes on him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_10">10&#160;</span>Will he delight himself in the Almighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and call on God at all times? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_11">11&#160;</span>I will teach you about the hand of God. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will not conceal that which is with the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_12">12&#160;</span>Behold, all of you have seen it yourselves; </div>
<div class='q2'>why then have you become altogether vain? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_13">13&#160;</span>“This is the portion of a wicked man with God, </div>
<div class='q2'>the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_14">14&#160;</span>If his children are multiplied, it is for the sword. </div>
<div class='q2'>His offspring will not be satisfied with bread. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_15">15&#160;</span>Those who remain of him will be buried in death. </div>
<div class='q2'>His widows will make no lamentation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_16">16&#160;</span>Though he heap up silver as the dust, </div>
<div class='q2'>and prepare clothing as the clay; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_17">17&#160;</span>he may prepare it, but the just will put it on, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the innocent will divide the silver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_18">18&#160;</span>He builds his house as the moth, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a booth which the watchman makes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_19">19&#160;</span>He lies down rich, but he will not do so again. </div>
<div class='q2'>He opens his eyes, and he is not. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_20">20&#160;</span>Terrors overtake him like waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>A storm steals him away in the night. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_21">21&#160;</span>The east wind carries him away, and he departs. </div>
<div class='q2'>It sweeps him out of his place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_22">22&#160;</span>For it hurls at him, and does not spare, </div>
<div class='q2'>as he flees away from his hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB27_23">23&#160;</span>Men will clap their hands at him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will hiss him out of his place. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB28_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 28</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_1">1&#160;</span>“Surely there is a mine for silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a place for gold which they refine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_2">2&#160;</span>Iron is taken out of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and copper is smelted out of the ore. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_3">3&#160;</span>Man sets an end to darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and searches out, to the furthest bound, </div>
<div class='q2'>the stones of obscurity and of thick darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_4">4&#160;</span>He breaks open a shaft away from where people live. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are forgotten by the foot. </div>
<div class='q2'>They hang far from men, they swing back and forth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_5">5&#160;</span>As for the earth, out of it comes bread. </div>
<div class='q2'>Underneath it is turned up as it were by fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_6">6&#160;</span>Sapphires come from its rocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>It has dust of gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_7">7&#160;</span>That path no bird of prey knows, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither has the falcon’s eye seen it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_8">8&#160;</span>The proud animals have not trodden it, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor has the fierce lion passed by there. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_9">9&#160;</span>He puts his hand on the flinty rock, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he overturns the mountains by the roots. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_10">10&#160;</span>He cuts out channels among the rocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eye sees every precious thing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_11">11&#160;</span>He binds the streams that they don’t trickle. </div>
<div class='q2'>The thing that is hidden he brings out to light. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_12">12&#160;</span>“But where will wisdom be found? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is the place of understanding? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_13">13&#160;</span>Man doesn’t know its price, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it isn’t found in the land of the living. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_14">14&#160;</span>The deep says, ‘It isn’t in me.’ </div>
<div class='q2'>The sea says, ‘It isn’t with me.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_15">15&#160;</span>It can’t be gotten for gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will silver be weighed for its price. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_16">16&#160;</span>It can’t be valued with the gold of Ophir, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_17">17&#160;</span>Gold and glass can’t equal it, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will it be exchanged for jewels of fine gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_18">18&#160;</span>No mention will be made of coral or of crystal. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, the price of wisdom is above rubies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_19">19&#160;</span>The topaz of Ethiopia will not equal it. </div>
<div class='q2'>It won’t be valued with pure gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_20">20&#160;</span>Where then does wisdom come from? </div>
<div class='q2'>Where is the place of understanding? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_21">21&#160;</span>Seeing it is hidden from the eyes of all living, </div>
<div class='q2'>and kept close from the birds of the sky. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_22">22&#160;</span>Destruction and Death say, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_23">23&#160;</span>“God understands its way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he knows its place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_24">24&#160;</span>For he looks to the ends of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sees under the whole sky. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_25">25&#160;</span>He establishes the force of the wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, he measures out the waters by measure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_26">26&#160;</span>When he made a decree for the rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a way for the lightning of the thunder, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_27">27&#160;</span>then he saw it, and declared it. </div>
<div class='q2'>He established it, yes, and searched it out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB28_28">28&#160;</span>To man he said, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Behold, the fear of the Lord,<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> that is wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>To depart from evil is understanding.’ ” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB29_0'>29</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_1">1&#160;</span>Job again took up his parable, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_2">2&#160;</span>“Oh that I were as in the months of old, </div>
<div class='q2'>as in the days when God watched over me; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_3">3&#160;</span>when his lamp shone on my head, </div>
<div class='q2'>and by his light I walked through darkness, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_4">4&#160;</span>as I was in my prime, </div>
<div class='q2'>when the friendship of God was in my tent, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_5">5&#160;</span>when the Almighty was yet with me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my children were around me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_6">6&#160;</span>when my steps were washed with butter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rock poured out streams of oil for me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_7">7&#160;</span>when I went out to the city gate, </div>
<div class='q2'>when I prepared my seat in the street. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_8">8&#160;</span>The young men saw me and hid themselves. </div>
<div class='q2'>The aged rose up and stood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_9">9&#160;</span>The princes refrained from talking, </div>
<div class='q2'>and laid their hand on their mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_10">10&#160;</span>The voice of the nobles was hushed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their tongue stuck to the roof of their mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_11">11&#160;</span>For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and when the eye saw me, it commended me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_12">12&#160;</span>because I delivered the poor who cried, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fatherless also, who had no one to help him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_13">13&#160;</span>the blessing of him who was ready to perish came on me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I caused the widow’s heart to sing for joy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_14">14&#160;</span>I put on righteousness, and it clothed me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My justice was as a robe and a diadem. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_15">15&#160;</span>I was eyes to the blind, </div>
<div class='q2'>and feet to the lame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_16">16&#160;</span>I was a father to the needy. </div>
<div class='q2'>I researched the cause of him whom I didn’t know. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_17">17&#160;</span>I broke the jaws of the unrighteous </div>
<div class='q2'>and plucked the prey out of his teeth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_18">18&#160;</span>Then I said, ‘I will die in my own house, </div>
<div class='q2'>I will count my days as the sand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_19">19&#160;</span>My root is spread out to the waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>The dew lies all night on my branch. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_20">20&#160;</span>My glory is fresh in me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My bow is renewed in my hand.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_21">21&#160;</span>“Men listened to me, waited, </div>
<div class='q2'>and kept silence for my counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_22">22&#160;</span>After my words they didn’t speak again. </div>
<div class='q2'>My speech fell on them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_23">23&#160;</span>They waited for me as for the rain. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their mouths drank as with the spring rain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_24">24&#160;</span>I smiled on them when they had no confidence. </div>
<div class='q2'>They didn’t reject the light of my face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB29_25">25&#160;</span>I chose out their way, and sat as chief. </div>
<div class='q2'>I lived as a king in the army, </div>
<div class='q2'>as one who comforts the mourners. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB30_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 30</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_1">1&#160;</span>“But now those who are younger than I have me in derision, </div>
<div class='q2'>whose fathers I considered unworthy to put with my sheep dogs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_2">2&#160;</span>Of what use is the strength of their hands to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>men in whom ripe age has perished? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_3">3&#160;</span>They are gaunt from lack and famine. </div>
<div class='q2'>They gnaw the dry ground, in the gloom of waste and desolation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_4">4&#160;</span>They pluck salt herbs by the bushes. </div>
<div class='q2'>The roots of the broom tree are their food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_5">5&#160;</span>They are driven out from among men. </div>
<div class='q2'>They cry after them as after a thief, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_6">6&#160;</span>so that they live in frightful valleys, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in holes of the earth and of the rocks. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_7">7&#160;</span>They bray among the bushes. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are gathered together under the nettles. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_8">8&#160;</span>They are children of fools, yes, children of wicked men. </div>
<div class='q2'>They were flogged out of the land. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_9">9&#160;</span>“Now I have become their song. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, I am a byword to them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_10">10&#160;</span>They abhor me, they stand aloof from me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t hesitate to spit in my face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_11">11&#160;</span>For he has untied his cord, and afflicted me; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they have thrown off restraint before me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_12">12&#160;</span>On my right hand rise the rabble. </div>
<div class='q2'>They thrust aside my feet. </div>
<div class='q2'>They cast their ways of destruction up against me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_13">13&#160;</span>They mar my path. </div>
<div class='q2'>They promote my destruction </div>
<div class='q2'>without anyone’s help. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_14">14&#160;</span>As through a wide breach they come. </div>
<div class='q2'>They roll themselves in amid the ruin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_15">15&#160;</span>Terrors have turned on me. </div>
<div class='q2'>They chase my honor as the wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>My welfare has passed away as a cloud. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_16">16&#160;</span>“Now my soul is poured out within me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Days of affliction have taken hold of me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_17">17&#160;</span>In the night season my bones are pierced in me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the pains that gnaw me take no rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_18">18&#160;</span>My garment is disfigured by great force. </div>
<div class='q2'>It binds me about as the collar of my tunic. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_19">19&#160;</span>He has cast me into the mire. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have become like dust and ashes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_20">20&#160;</span>I cry to you, and you do not answer me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I stand up, and you gaze at me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_21">21&#160;</span>You have turned to be cruel to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>With the might of your hand you persecute me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_22">22&#160;</span>You lift me up to the wind, and drive me with it. </div>
<div class='q2'>You dissolve me in the storm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_23">23&#160;</span>For I know that you will bring me to death, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the house appointed for all living. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_24">24&#160;</span>“However doesn’t one stretch out a hand in his fall? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or in his calamity therefore cry for help? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_25">25&#160;</span>Didn’t I weep for him who was in trouble? </div>
<div class='q2'>Wasn’t my soul grieved for the needy? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_26">26&#160;</span>When I looked for good, then evil came. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I waited for light, darkness came. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_27">27&#160;</span>My heart is troubled, and doesn’t rest. </div>
<div class='q2'>Days of affliction have come on me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_28">28&#160;</span>I go mourning without the sun. </div>
<div class='q2'>I stand up in the assembly, and cry for help. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_29">29&#160;</span>I am a brother to jackals, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a companion to ostriches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_30">30&#160;</span>My skin grows black and peels from me. </div>
<div class='q2'>My bones are burned with heat. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB30_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore my harp has turned to mourning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my pipe into the voice of those who weep. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB31_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 31</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_1">1&#160;</span>“I made a covenant with my eyes; </div>
<div class='q2'>how then should I look lustfully at a young woman? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_2">2&#160;</span>For what is the portion from God above, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the heritage from the Almighty on high? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_3">3&#160;</span>Is it not calamity to the unrighteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>and disaster to the workers of iniquity? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_4">4&#160;</span>Doesn’t he see my ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and count all my steps? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_5">5&#160;</span>“If I have walked with falsehood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my foot has hurried to deceit </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_6">6&#160;</span>(let me be weighed in an even balance, </div>
<div class='q2'>that God may know my integrity); </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_7">7&#160;</span>if my step has turned out of the way, </div>
<div class='q2'>if my heart walked after my eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>if any defilement has stuck to my hands, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_8">8&#160;</span>then let me sow, and let another eat. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, let the produce of my field be rooted out. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_9">9&#160;</span>“If my heart has been enticed to a woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have laid wait at my neighbor’s door, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_10">10&#160;</span>then let my wife grind for another, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let others sleep with her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_11">11&#160;</span>For that would be a heinous crime. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, it would be an iniquity to be punished by the judges, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_12">12&#160;</span>for it is a fire that consumes to destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and would root out all my increase. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_13">13&#160;</span>“If I have despised the cause of my male servant </div>
<div class='q2'>or of my female servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>when they contended with me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_14">14&#160;</span>what then will I do when God rises up? </div>
<div class='q2'>When he visits, what will I answer him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_15">15&#160;</span>Didn’t he who made me in the womb make him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Didn’t one fashion us in the womb? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_16">16&#160;</span>“If I have withheld the poor from their desire, </div>
<div class='q2'>or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_17">17&#160;</span>or have eaten my morsel alone, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fatherless has not eaten of it </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_18">18&#160;</span>(no, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father, </div>
<div class='q2'>I have guided her from my mother’s womb); </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_19">19&#160;</span>if I have seen any perish for want of clothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>or that the needy had no covering; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_20">20&#160;</span>if his heart hasn’t blessed me, </div>
<div class='q2'>if he hasn’t been warmed with my sheep’s fleece; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_21">21&#160;</span>if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q2'>because I saw my help in the gate; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_22">22&#160;</span>then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder blade, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my arm be broken from the bone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_23">23&#160;</span>For calamity from God is a terror to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Because of his majesty, I can do nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_24">24&#160;</span>“If I have made gold my hope, </div>
<div class='q2'>and have said to the fine gold, ‘You are my confidence;’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_25">25&#160;</span>If I have rejoiced because my wealth was great, </div>
<div class='q2'>and because my hand had gotten much; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_26">26&#160;</span>if I have seen the sun when it shined, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the moon moving in splendor, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_27">27&#160;</span>and my heart has been secretly enticed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my hand threw a kiss from my mouth; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_28">28&#160;</span>this also would be an iniquity to be punished by the judges, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I should have denied the God who is above. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_29">29&#160;</span>“If I have rejoiced at the destruction of him who hated me, </div>
<div class='q2'>or lifted up myself when evil found him </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_30">30&#160;</span>(I have certainly not allowed my mouth to sin </div>
<div class='q2'>by asking his life with a curse); </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_31">31&#160;</span>if the men of my tent have not said, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Who can find one who has not been filled with his meat?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_32">32&#160;</span>(the foreigner has not camped in the street, </div>
<div class='q2'>but I have opened my doors to the traveler); </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_33">33&#160;</span>if like Adam I have covered my transgressions, </div>
<div class='q2'>by hiding my iniquity in my heart, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_34">34&#160;</span>because I feared the great multitude, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the contempt of families terrified me, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that I kept silence, and didn’t go out of the door— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_35">35&#160;</span>oh that I had one to hear me! </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold, here is my signature! Let the Almighty answer me! </div>
<div class='q2'>Let the accuser write my indictment! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_36">36&#160;</span>Surely I would carry it on my shoulder, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I would bind it to me as a crown. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_37">37&#160;</span>I would declare to him the number of my steps. </div>
<div class='q2'>I would go near to him like a prince. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_38">38&#160;</span>If my land cries out against me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its furrows weep together; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_39">39&#160;</span>if I have eaten its fruits without money, </div>
<div class='q2'>or have caused its owners to lose their life, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB31_40">40&#160;</span>let briers grow instead of wheat, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stinkweed instead of barley.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>The words of Job are ended.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB32_0'>32</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_1">1&#160;</span>So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous in his own eyes. 
<span class="verse" id="JB32_2">2&#160;</span>Then the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel, the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was kindled against Job. His wrath was kindled because he justified himself rather than God. 
<span class="verse" id="JB32_3">3&#160;</span>Also his wrath was kindled against his three friends, because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job. 
<span class="verse" id="JB32_4">4&#160;</span>Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they were elder than he. 
<span class="verse" id="JB32_5">5&#160;</span>When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, his wrath was kindled. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_6">6&#160;</span>Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered, </div>
<div class='q'>“I am young, and you are very old. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore I held back, and didn’t dare show you my opinion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_7">7&#160;</span>I said, ‘Days should speak, </div>
<div class='q2'>and multitude of years should teach wisdom.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_8">8&#160;</span>But there is a spirit in man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the Spirit<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of the Almighty gives them understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_9">9&#160;</span>It is not the great who are wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the aged who understand justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_10">10&#160;</span>Therefore I said, ‘Listen to me; </div>
<div class='q2'>I also will show my opinion.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_11">11&#160;</span>“Behold, I waited for your words, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I listened for your reasoning, </div>
<div class='q2'>while you searched out what to say. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_12">12&#160;</span>Yes, I gave you my full attention, </div>
<div class='q2'>but there was no one who convinced Job, </div>
<div class='q2'>or who answered his words, among you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_13">13&#160;</span>Beware lest you say, ‘We have found wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>God may refute him, not man;’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_14">14&#160;</span>for he has not directed his words against me; </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will I answer him with your speeches. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_15">15&#160;</span>“They are amazed. They answer no more. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t have a word to say. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_16">16&#160;</span>Shall I wait, because they don’t speak, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they stand still, and answer no more? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_17">17&#160;</span>I also will answer my part, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I also will show my opinion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_18">18&#160;</span>For I am full of words. </div>
<div class='q2'>The spirit within me constrains me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_19">19&#160;</span>Behold, my breast is as wine which has no vent; </div>
<div class='q2'>like new wineskins it is ready to burst. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_20">20&#160;</span>I will speak, that I may be refreshed. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will open my lips and answer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_21">21&#160;</span>Please don’t let me respect any man’s person, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will I give flattering titles to any man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB32_22">22&#160;</span>For I don’t know how to give flattering titles, </div>
<div class='q2'>or else my Maker would soon take me away. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB33_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 33</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_1">1&#160;</span>“However, Job, please hear my speech, </div>
<div class='q2'>and listen to all my words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_2">2&#160;</span>See now, I have opened my mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>My tongue has spoken in my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_3">3&#160;</span>My words will utter the uprightness of my heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>That which my lips know they will speak sincerely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_4">4&#160;</span>The Spirit of God has made me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the breath of the Almighty gives me life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_5">5&#160;</span>If you can, answer me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Set your words in order before me, and stand up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_6">6&#160;</span>Behold, I am toward God even as you are. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am also formed out of the clay. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_7">7&#160;</span>Behold, my terror will not make you afraid, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will my pressure be heavy on you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_8">8&#160;</span>“Surely you have spoken in my hearing, </div>
<div class='q2'>I have heard the voice of your words, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_9">9&#160;</span>‘I am clean, without disobedience. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, he finds occasions against me. </div>
<div class='q2'>He counts me for his enemy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_11">11&#160;</span>He puts my feet in the stocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>He marks all my paths.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_12">12&#160;</span>“Behold, I will answer you. In this you are not just, </div>
<div class='q2'>for God is greater than man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_13">13&#160;</span>Why do you strive against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he doesn’t give account of any of his matters? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_14">14&#160;</span>For God speaks once, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes twice, though man pays no attention. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_15">15&#160;</span>In a dream, in a vision of the night, </div>
<div class='q2'>when deep sleep falls on men, </div>
<div class='q2'>in slumbering on the bed, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_16">16&#160;</span>then he opens the ears of men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and seals their instruction, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_17">17&#160;</span>that he may withdraw man from his purpose, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hide pride from man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_18">18&#160;</span>He keeps back his soul from the pit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his life from perishing by the sword. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_19">19&#160;</span>“He is chastened also with pain on his bed, </div>
<div class='q2'>with continual strife in his bones, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_20">20&#160;</span>so that his life abhors bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his soul dainty food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_21">21&#160;</span>His flesh is so consumed away that it can’t be seen. </div>
<div class='q2'>His bones that were not seen stick out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_22">22&#160;</span>Yes, his soul draws near to the pit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his life to the destroyers. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_23">23&#160;</span>“If there is beside him an angel, </div>
<div class='q2'>an interpreter, one among a thousand, </div>
<div class='q2'>to show to man what is right for him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_24">24&#160;</span>then God is gracious to him, and says, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Deliver him from going down to the pit, </div>
<div class='q2'>I have found a ransom.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_25">25&#160;</span>His flesh will be fresher than a child’s. </div>
<div class='q2'>He returns to the days of his youth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_26">26&#160;</span>He prays to God, and he is favorable to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that he sees his face with joy. </div>
<div class='q2'>He restores to man his righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_27">27&#160;</span>He sings before men, and says, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it didn’t profit me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_28">28&#160;</span>He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit. </div>
<div class='q2'>My life will see the light.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_29">29&#160;</span>“Behold, God does all these things, </div>
<div class='q2'>twice, yes three times, with a man, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_30">30&#160;</span>to bring back his soul from the pit, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he may be enlightened with the light of the living. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_31">31&#160;</span>Mark well, Job, and listen to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hold your peace, and I will speak. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_32">32&#160;</span>If you have anything to say, answer me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Speak, for I desire to justify you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB33_33">33&#160;</span>If not, listen to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hold your peace, and I will teach you wisdom.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB34_0'>34</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_1">1&#160;</span>Moreover Elihu answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_2">2&#160;</span>“Hear my words, you wise men. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give ear to me, you who have knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_3">3&#160;</span>For the ear tries words, </div>
<div class='q2'>as the palate tastes food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_4">4&#160;</span>Let us choose for us that which is right. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let us know among ourselves what is good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_5">5&#160;</span>For Job has said, ‘I am righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>God has taken away my right. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_6">6&#160;</span>Notwithstanding my right I am considered a liar. </div>
<div class='q2'>My wound is incurable, though I am without disobedience.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_7">7&#160;</span>What man is like Job, </div>
<div class='q2'>who drinks scorn like water, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_8">8&#160;</span>who goes in company with the workers of iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and walks with wicked men? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_9">9&#160;</span>For he has said, ‘It profits a man nothing </div>
<div class='q2'>that he should delight himself with God.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_10">10&#160;</span>“Therefore listen to me, you men of understanding: </div>
<div class='q2'>far be it from God, that he should do wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the Almighty, that he should commit iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_11">11&#160;</span>For the work of a man he will render to him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cause every man to find according to his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_12">12&#160;</span>Yes surely, God will not do wickedly, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will the Almighty pervert justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_13">13&#160;</span>Who put him in charge of the earth? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who has appointed him over the whole world? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_14">14&#160;</span>If he set his heart on himself, </div>
<div class='q2'>if he gathered to himself his spirit and his breath, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_15">15&#160;</span>all flesh would perish together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and man would turn again to dust. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_16">16&#160;</span>“If now you have understanding, hear this. </div>
<div class='q2'>Listen to the voice of my words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_17">17&#160;</span>Should even one who hates justice govern? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you condemn him who is righteous and mighty, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_18">18&#160;</span>who says to a king, ‘Vile!’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or to nobles, ‘Wicked!’? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_19">19&#160;</span>He doesn’t respect the persons of princes, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor respect the rich more than the poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they all are the work of his hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_20">20&#160;</span>In a moment they die, even at midnight. </div>
<div class='q2'>The people are shaken and pass away. </div>
<div class='q2'>The mighty are taken away without a hand. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_21">21&#160;</span>“For his eyes are on the ways of a man. </div>
<div class='q2'>He sees all his goings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_22">22&#160;</span>There is no darkness, nor thick gloom, </div>
<div class='q2'>where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_23">23&#160;</span>For he doesn’t need to consider a man further, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he should go before God in judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_24">24&#160;</span>He breaks mighty men in pieces in ways past finding out, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sets others in their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore he takes knowledge of their works. </div>
<div class='q2'>He overturns them in the night, so that they are destroyed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_26">26&#160;</span>He strikes them as wicked men </div>
<div class='q2'>in the open sight of others; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_27">27&#160;</span>because they turned away from following him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wouldn’t pay attention to any of his ways, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_28">28&#160;</span>so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He heard the cry of the afflicted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_29">29&#160;</span>When he gives quietness, who then can condemn? </div>
<div class='q2'>When he hides his face, who then can see him? </div>
<div class='q2'>He is over a nation or a man alike, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_30">30&#160;</span>that the godless man may not reign, </div>
<div class='q2'>that there be no one to ensnare the people. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_31">31&#160;</span>“For has any said to God, </div>
<div class='q2'>‘I am guilty, but I will not offend any more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_32">32&#160;</span>Teach me that which I don’t see. </div>
<div class='q2'>If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more’? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_33">33&#160;</span>Shall his recompense be as you desire, that you refuse it? </div>
<div class='q2'>For you must choose, and not I. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore speak what you know. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_34">34&#160;</span>Men of understanding will tell me, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, every wise man who hears me: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_35">35&#160;</span>‘Job speaks without knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>His words are without wisdom.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_36">36&#160;</span>I wish that Job were tried to the end, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of his answering like wicked men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB34_37">37&#160;</span>For he adds rebellion to his sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>He claps his hands among us, </div>
<div class='q2'>and multiplies his words against God.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB35_0'>35</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_1">1&#160;</span>Moreover Elihu answered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_2">2&#160;</span>“Do you think this to be your right, </div>
<div class='q2'>or do you say, ‘My righteousness is more than God’s,’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_3">3&#160;</span>that you ask, ‘What advantage will it be to you? </div>
<div class='q2'>What profit will I have, more than if I had sinned?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_4">4&#160;</span>I will answer you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your companions with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_5">5&#160;</span>Look to the skies, and see. </div>
<div class='q2'>See the skies, which are higher than you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_6">6&#160;</span>If you have sinned, what effect do you have against him? </div>
<div class='q2'>If your transgressions are multiplied, what do you do to him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_7">7&#160;</span>If you are righteous, what do you give him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or what does he receive from your hand? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_8">8&#160;</span>Your wickedness may hurt a man as you are, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your righteousness may profit a son of man. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_9">9&#160;</span>“By reason of the multitude of oppressions they cry out. </div>
<div class='q2'>They cry for help by reason of the arm of the mighty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_10">10&#160;</span>But no one says, ‘Where is God my Maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>who gives songs in the night, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_11">11&#160;</span>who teaches us more than the animals of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes us wiser than the birds of the sky?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_12">12&#160;</span>There they cry, but no one answers, </div>
<div class='q2'>because of the pride of evil men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_13">13&#160;</span>Surely God will not hear an empty cry, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will the Almighty regard it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_14">14&#160;</span>How much less when you say you don’t see him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The cause is before him, and you wait for him! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_15">15&#160;</span>But now, because he has not visited in his anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does he greatly regard arrogance, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB35_16">16&#160;</span>therefore Job opens his mouth with empty talk, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he multiplies words without knowledge.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB36_0'>36</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_1">1&#160;</span>Elihu also continued, and said, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_2">2&#160;</span>“Bear with me a little, and I will show you; </div>
<div class='q2'>for I still have something to say on God’s behalf. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_3">3&#160;</span>I will get my knowledge from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_4">4&#160;</span>For truly my words are not false. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who is perfect in knowledge is with you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_5">5&#160;</span>“Behold, God is mighty, and doesn’t despise anyone. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is mighty in strength of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_6">6&#160;</span>He doesn’t preserve the life of the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>but gives justice to the afflicted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_7">7&#160;</span>He doesn’t withdraw his eyes from the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>but with kings on the throne, </div>
<div class='q2'>he sets them forever, and they are exalted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_8">8&#160;</span>If they are bound in fetters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and are taken in the cords of afflictions, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_9">9&#160;</span>then he shows them their work, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_10">10&#160;</span>He also opens their ears to instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and commands that they return from iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_11">11&#160;</span>If they listen and serve him, </div>
<div class='q2'>they will spend their days in prosperity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their years in pleasures. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_12">12&#160;</span>But if they don’t listen, they will perish by the sword; </div>
<div class='q2'>they will die without knowledge. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_13">13&#160;</span>“But those who are godless in heart lay up anger. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t cry for help when he binds them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_14">14&#160;</span>They die in youth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their life perishes among the unclean. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_15">15&#160;</span>He delivers the afflicted by their affliction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and opens their ear in oppression. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_16">16&#160;</span>Yes, he would have allured you out of distress, </div>
<div class='q2'>into a wide place, where there is no restriction. </div>
<div class='q2'>That which is set on your table would be full of fatness. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_17">17&#160;</span>“But you are full of the judgment of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>Judgment and justice take hold of you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_18">18&#160;</span>Don’t let riches entice you to wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither let the great size of a bribe turn you aside. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_19">19&#160;</span>Would your wealth sustain you in distress, </div>
<div class='q2'>or all the might of your strength? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t desire the night, </div>
<div class='q2'>when people are cut off in their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_21">21&#160;</span>Take heed, don’t regard iniquity; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you have chosen this rather than affliction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_22">22&#160;</span>Behold, God is exalted in his power. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who is a teacher like him? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_23">23&#160;</span>Who has prescribed his way for him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who can say, ‘You have committed unrighteousness?’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_24">24&#160;</span>“Remember that you magnify his work, </div>
<div class='q2'>about which men have sung. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_25">25&#160;</span>All men have looked on it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Man sees it afar off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_26">26&#160;</span>Behold, God is great, and we don’t know him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The number of his years is unsearchable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_27">27&#160;</span>For he draws up the drops of water, </div>
<div class='q2'>which distill in rain from his vapor, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_28">28&#160;</span>which the skies pour down </div>
<div class='q2'>and which drop on man abundantly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_29">29&#160;</span>Indeed, can anyone understand the spreading of the clouds </div>
<div class='q2'>and the thunderings of his pavilion? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_30">30&#160;</span>Behold, he spreads his light around him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He covers the bottom of the sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_31">31&#160;</span>For by these he judges the people. </div>
<div class='q2'>He gives food in abundance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_32">32&#160;</span>He covers his hands with the lightning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and commands it to strike the mark. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB36_33">33&#160;</span>Its noise tells about him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the livestock also, concerning the storm that comes up. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB37_0'> 37</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_1">1&#160;</span>“Yes, at this my heart trembles, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is moved out of its place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_2">2&#160;</span>Hear, oh, hear the noise of his voice, </div>
<div class='q2'>the sound that goes out of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_3">3&#160;</span>He sends it out under the whole sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his lightning to the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_4">4&#160;</span>After it a voice roars. </div>
<div class='q2'>He thunders with the voice of his majesty. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t hold back anything when his voice is heard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_5">5&#160;</span>God thunders marvelously with his voice. </div>
<div class='q2'>He does great things, which we can’t comprehend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_6">6&#160;</span>For he says to the snow, ‘Fall on the earth,’ </div>
<div class='q2'>likewise to the shower of rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to the showers of his mighty rain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_7">7&#160;</span>He seals up the hand of every man, </div>
<div class='q2'>that all men whom he has made may know it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_8">8&#160;</span>Then the animals take cover, </div>
<div class='q2'>and remain in their dens. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_9">9&#160;</span>Out of its room comes the storm, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cold out of the north. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_10">10&#160;</span>By the breath of God, ice is given, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the width of the waters is frozen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_11">11&#160;</span>Yes, he loads the thick cloud with moisture. </div>
<div class='q2'>He spreads abroad the cloud of his lightning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_12">12&#160;</span>It is turned around by his guidance, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they may do whatever he commands them </div>
<div class='q2'>on the surface of the habitable world, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_13">13&#160;</span>whether it is for correction, or for his land, </div>
<div class='q2'>or for loving kindness, that he causes it to come. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_14">14&#160;</span>“Listen to this, Job. </div>
<div class='q2'>Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_15">15&#160;</span>Do you know how God controls them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and causes the lightning of his cloud to shine? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_16">16&#160;</span>Do you know the workings of the clouds, </div>
<div class='q2'>the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_17">17&#160;</span>You whose clothing is warm </div>
<div class='q2'>when the earth is still by reason of the south wind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_18">18&#160;</span>Can you, with him, spread out the sky, </div>
<div class='q2'>which is strong as a cast metal mirror? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_19">19&#160;</span>Teach us what we will tell him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for we can’t make our case by reason of darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_20">20&#160;</span>Will it be told him that I would speak? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or should a man wish that he were swallowed up? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_21">21&#160;</span>Now men don’t see the light which is bright in the skies, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wind passes, and clears them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_22">22&#160;</span>Out of the north comes golden splendor. </div>
<div class='q2'>With God is awesome majesty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_23">23&#160;</span>We can’t reach the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is exalted in power. </div>
<div class='q2'>In justice and great righteousness, he will not oppress. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB37_24">24&#160;</span>Therefore men revere him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t regard any who are wise of heart.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB38_0'>38</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_1">1&#160;</span>Then Yahweh answered Job out of the whirlwind, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_2">2&#160;</span>“Who is this who darkens counsel </div>
<div class='q2'>by words without knowledge? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_3">3&#160;</span>Brace yourself like a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>for I will question you, then you answer me! </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_4">4&#160;</span>“Where were you when I laid the foundations of the earth? </div>
<div class='q2'>Declare, if you have understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_5">5&#160;</span>Who determined its measures, if you know? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who stretched the line on it? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_6">6&#160;</span>What were its foundations fastened on? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who laid its cornerstone, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_7">7&#160;</span>when the morning stars sang together, </div>
<div class='q2'>and all the sons of God shouted for joy? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_8">8&#160;</span>“Or who shut up the sea with doors, </div>
<div class='q2'>when it broke out of the womb, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_9">9&#160;</span>when I made clouds its garment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wrapped it in thick darkness, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_10">10&#160;</span>marked out for it my bound, </div>
<div class='q2'>set bars and doors, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_11">11&#160;</span>and said, ‘You may come here, but no further. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your proud waves shall be stopped here’? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_12">12&#160;</span>“Have you commanded the morning in your days, </div>
<div class='q2'>and caused the dawn to know its place, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_13">13&#160;</span>that it might take hold of the ends of the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shake the wicked out of it? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_14">14&#160;</span>It is changed as clay under the seal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and presented as a garment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_15">15&#160;</span>From the wicked, their light is withheld. </div>
<div class='q2'>The high arm is broken. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_16">16&#160;</span>“Have you entered into the springs of the sea? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or have you walked in the recesses of the deep? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_17">17&#160;</span>Have the gates of death been revealed to you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or have you seen the gates of the shadow of death? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_18">18&#160;</span>Have you comprehended the earth in its width? </div>
<div class='q2'>Declare, if you know it all. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_19">19&#160;</span>“What is the way to the dwelling of light? </div>
<div class='q2'>As for darkness, where is its place, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_20">20&#160;</span>that you should take it to its bound, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you should discern the paths to its house? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_21">21&#160;</span>Surely you know, for you were born then, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the number of your days is great! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_22">22&#160;</span>Have you entered the storehouses of the snow, </div>
<div class='q2'>or have you seen the storehouses of the hail, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_23">23&#160;</span>which I have reserved against the time of trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>against the day of battle and war? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_24">24&#160;</span>By what way is the lightning distributed, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the east wind scattered on the earth? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_25">25&#160;</span>Who has cut a channel for the flood water, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the path for the thunderstorm, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_26">26&#160;</span>to cause it to rain on a land where there is no man, </div>
<div class='q2'>on the wilderness, in which there is no man, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_27">27&#160;</span>to satisfy the waste and desolate ground, </div>
<div class='q2'>to cause the tender grass to grow? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_28">28&#160;</span>Does the rain have a father? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who fathers the drops of dew? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_29">29&#160;</span>Whose womb did the ice come out of? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has given birth to the gray frost of the sky? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_30">30&#160;</span>The waters become hard like stone, </div>
<div class='q2'>when the surface of the deep is frozen. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_31">31&#160;</span>“Can you bind the cluster of the Pleiades, </div>
<div class='q2'>or loosen the cords of Orion? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_32">32&#160;</span>Can you lead the constellations out in their season? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or can you guide the Bear with her cubs? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_33">33&#160;</span>Do you know the laws of the heavens? </div>
<div class='q2'>Can you establish its dominion over the earth? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_34">34&#160;</span>“Can you lift up your voice to the clouds, </div>
<div class='q2'>that abundance of waters may cover you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_35">35&#160;</span>Can you send out lightnings, that they may go? </div>
<div class='q2'>Do they report to you, ‘Here we are’? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_36">36&#160;</span>Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who has given understanding to the mind? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_37">37&#160;</span>Who can count the clouds by wisdom? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who can pour out the containers of the sky, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_38">38&#160;</span>when the dust runs into a mass, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the clods of earth stick together? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_39">39&#160;</span>“Can you hunt the prey for the lioness, </div>
<div class='q2'>or satisfy the appetite of the young lions, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_40">40&#160;</span>when they crouch in their dens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lie in wait in the thicket? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB38_41">41&#160;</span>Who provides for the raven his prey, </div>
<div class='q2'>when his young ones cry to God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wander for lack of food? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='JB39_0'> 39</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_1">1&#160;</span>“Do you know the time when the mountain goats give birth? </div>
<div class='q2'>Do you watch when the doe bears fawns? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_2">2&#160;</span>Can you count the months that they fulfill? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or do you know the time when they give birth? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_3">3&#160;</span>They bow themselves. They bear their young. </div>
<div class='q2'>They end their labor pains. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_4">4&#160;</span>Their young ones become strong. </div>
<div class='q2'>They grow up in the open field. </div>
<div class='q2'>They go out, and don’t return again. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_5">5&#160;</span>“Who has set the wild donkey free? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who has loosened the bonds of the swift donkey, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_6">6&#160;</span>whose home I have made the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the salt land his dwelling place? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_7">7&#160;</span>He scorns the tumult of the city, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does he hear the shouting of the driver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_8">8&#160;</span>The range of the mountains is his pasture. </div>
<div class='q2'>He searches after every green thing. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_9">9&#160;</span>“Will the wild ox be content to serve you? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or will he stay by your feeding trough? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_10">10&#160;</span>Can you hold the wild ox in the furrow with his harness? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or will he till the valleys after you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_11">11&#160;</span>Will you trust him, because his strength is great? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or will you leave to him your labor? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_12">12&#160;</span>Will you confide in him, that he will bring home your seed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gather the grain of your threshing floor? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_13">13&#160;</span>“The wings of the ostrich wave proudly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but are they the feathers and plumage of love? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_14">14&#160;</span>For she leaves her eggs on the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>warms them in the dust, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_15">15&#160;</span>and forgets that the foot may crush them, </div>
<div class='q2'>or that the wild animal may trample them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_16">16&#160;</span>She deals harshly with her young ones, as if they were not hers. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though her labor is in vain, she is without fear, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_17">17&#160;</span>because God has deprived her of wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither has he imparted to her understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_18">18&#160;</span>When she lifts up herself on high, </div>
<div class='q2'>she scorns the horse and his rider. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_19">19&#160;</span>“Have you given the horse might? </div>
<div class='q2'>Have you clothed his neck with a quivering mane? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_20">20&#160;</span>Have you made him to leap as a locust? </div>
<div class='q2'>The glory of his snorting is awesome. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_21">21&#160;</span>He paws in the valley, and rejoices in his strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>He goes out to meet the armed men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_22">22&#160;</span>He mocks at fear, and is not dismayed, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does he turn back from the sword. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_23">23&#160;</span>The quiver rattles against him, </div>
<div class='q2'>the flashing spear and the javelin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_24">24&#160;</span>He eats up the ground with fierceness and rage, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does he stand still at the sound of the trumpet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_25">25&#160;</span>As often as the trumpet sounds he snorts, ‘Aha!’ </div>
<div class='q2'>He smells the battle afar off, </div>
<div class='q2'>the thunder of the captains, and the shouting. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_26">26&#160;</span>“Is it by your wisdom that the hawk soars, </div>
<div class='q2'>and stretches her wings toward the south? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_27">27&#160;</span>Is it at your command that the eagle mounts up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes his nest on high? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_28">28&#160;</span>On the cliff he dwells and makes his home, </div>
<div class='q2'>on the point of the cliff and the stronghold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_29">29&#160;</span>From there he spies out the prey. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eyes see it afar off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB39_30">30&#160;</span>His young ones also suck up blood. </div>
<div class='q2'>Where the slain are, there he is.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB40_0'>40</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_1">1&#160;</span>Moreover Yahweh answered Job, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_2">2&#160;</span>“Shall he who argues contend with the Almighty? </div>
<div class='q2'>He who argues with God, let him answer it.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_3">3&#160;</span>Then Job answered Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_4">4&#160;</span>“Behold, I am of small account. What will I answer you? </div>
<div class='q2'>I lay my hand on my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_5">5&#160;</span>I have spoken once, and I will not answer; </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, twice, but I will proceed no further.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_6">6&#160;</span>Then Yahweh answered Job out of the whirlwind: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_7">7&#160;</span>“Now brace yourself like a man. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will question you, and you will answer me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_8">8&#160;</span>Will you even annul my judgment? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will you condemn me, that you may be justified? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_9">9&#160;</span>Or do you have an arm like God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Can you thunder with a voice like him? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_10">10&#160;</span>“Now deck yourself with excellency and dignity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Array yourself with honor and majesty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_11">11&#160;</span>Pour out the fury of your anger. </div>
<div class='q2'>Look at everyone who is proud, and bring him low. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_12">12&#160;</span>Look at everyone who is proud, and humble him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Crush the wicked in their place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_13">13&#160;</span>Hide them in the dust together. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bind their faces in the hidden place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_14">14&#160;</span>Then I will also admit to you </div>
<div class='q2'>that your own right hand can save you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_15">15&#160;</span>“See now behemoth, which I made as well as you. </div>
<div class='q2'>He eats grass as an ox. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_16">16&#160;</span>Look now, his strength is in his thighs. </div>
<div class='q2'>His force is in the muscles of his belly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_17">17&#160;</span>He moves his tail like a cedar. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sinews of his thighs are knit together. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_18">18&#160;</span>His bones are like tubes of bronze. </div>
<div class='q2'>His limbs are like bars of iron. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_19">19&#160;</span>He is the chief of the ways of God. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who made him gives him his sword. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_20">20&#160;</span>Surely the mountains produce food for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>where all the animals of the field play. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_21">21&#160;</span>He lies under the lotus trees, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the covert of the reed, and the marsh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_22">22&#160;</span>The lotuses cover him with their shade. </div>
<div class='q2'>The willows of the brook surround him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_23">23&#160;</span>Behold, if a river overflows, he doesn’t tremble. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is confident, though the Jordan swells even to his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB40_24">24&#160;</span>Shall any take him when he is on the watch, </div>
<div class='q2'>or pierce through his nose with a snare? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='b' id='JB41_0'> &#160; </div>
<div class='psalmlabel'> 41</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_1">1&#160;</span>“Can you draw out Leviathan<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> with a fish hook, </div>
<div class='q2'>or press down his tongue with a cord? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_2">2&#160;</span>Can you put a rope into his nose, </div>
<div class='q2'>or pierce his jaw through with a hook? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_3">3&#160;</span>Will he make many petitions to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>or will he speak soft words to you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_4">4&#160;</span>Will he make a covenant with you, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you should take him for a servant forever? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_5">5&#160;</span>Will you play with him as with a bird? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or will you bind him for your girls? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_6">6&#160;</span>Will traders barter for him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Will they part him among the merchants? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_7">7&#160;</span>Can you fill his skin with barbed irons, </div>
<div class='q2'>or his head with fish spears? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_8">8&#160;</span>Lay your hand on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remember the battle, and do so no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_9">9&#160;</span>Behold, the hope of him is in vain. </div>
<div class='q2'>Won’t one be cast down even at the sight of him? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_10">10&#160;</span>None is so fierce that he dare stir him up. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who then is he who can stand before me? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_11">11&#160;</span>Who has first given to me, that I should repay him? </div>
<div class='q2'>Everything under the heavens is mine. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_12">12&#160;</span>“I will not keep silence concerning his limbs, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor his mighty strength, nor his goodly frame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_13">13&#160;</span>Who can strip off his outer garment? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who will come within his jaws? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_14">14&#160;</span>Who can open the doors of his face? </div>
<div class='q2'>Around his teeth is terror. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_15">15&#160;</span>Strong scales are his pride, </div>
<div class='q2'>shut up together with a close seal. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_16">16&#160;</span>One is so near to another, </div>
<div class='q2'>that no air can come between them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_17">17&#160;</span>They are joined to one another. </div>
<div class='q2'>They stick together, so that they can’t be pulled apart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_18">18&#160;</span>His sneezing flashes out light. </div>
<div class='q2'>His eyes are like the eyelids of the morning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_19">19&#160;</span>Out of his mouth go burning torches. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sparks of fire leap out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_20">20&#160;</span>Out of his nostrils a smoke goes, </div>
<div class='q2'>as of a boiling pot over a fire of reeds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_21">21&#160;</span>His breath kindles coals. </div>
<div class='q2'>A flame goes out of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_22">22&#160;</span>There is strength in his neck. </div>
<div class='q2'>Terror dances before him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_23">23&#160;</span>The flakes of his flesh are joined together. </div>
<div class='q2'>They are firm on him. </div>
<div class='q2'>They can’t be moved. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_24">24&#160;</span>His heart is as firm as a stone, </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, firm as the lower millstone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_25">25&#160;</span>When he raises himself up, the mighty are afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>They retreat before his thrashing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_26">26&#160;</span>If one attacks him with the sword, it can’t prevail; </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_27">27&#160;</span>He counts iron as straw, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bronze as rotten wood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_28">28&#160;</span>The arrow can’t make him flee. </div>
<div class='q2'>Sling stones are like chaff to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_29">29&#160;</span>Clubs are counted as stubble. </div>
<div class='q2'>He laughs at the rushing of the javelin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_30">30&#160;</span>His undersides are like sharp potsherds, </div>
<div class='q2'>leaving a trail in the mud like a threshing sledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_31">31&#160;</span>He makes the deep to boil like a pot. </div>
<div class='q2'>He makes the sea like a pot of ointment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_32">32&#160;</span>He makes a path shine after him. </div>
<div class='q2'>One would think the deep had white hair. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_33">33&#160;</span>On earth there is not his equal, </div>
<div class='q2'>that is made without fear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB41_34">34&#160;</span>He sees everything that is high. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is king over all the sons of pride.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='chapterlabel' id='JB42_0'>42</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_1">1&#160;</span>Then Job answered Yahweh: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_2">2&#160;</span>“I know that you can do all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that no purpose of yours can be restrained. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_3">3&#160;</span>You asked, ‘Who is this who hides counsel without knowledge?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore I have uttered that which I didn’t understand, </div>
<div class='q2'>things too wonderful for me, which I didn’t know. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_4">4&#160;</span>You said, ‘Listen, now, and I will speak; </div>
<div class='q2'>I will question you, and you will answer me.’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_5">5&#160;</span>I had heard of you by the hearing of the ear, </div>
<div class='q2'>but now my eye sees you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_6">6&#160;</span>Therefore I abhor myself, </div>
<div class='q2'>and repent in dust and ashes.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_7">7&#160;</span>It was so, that after Yahweh had spoken these words to Job, Yahweh said to Eliphaz the Temanite, “My wrath is kindled against you, and against your two friends; for you have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_8">8&#160;</span>Now therefore, take to yourselves seven bulls and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering; and my servant Job shall pray for you, for I will accept him, that I not deal with you according to your folly. For you have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_9">9&#160;</span>So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did what Yahweh commanded them, and Yahweh accepted Job. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh restored Job’s prosperity when he prayed for his friends. Yahweh gave Job twice as much as he had before. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_11">11&#160;</span>Then all his brothers, all his sisters, and all those who had been of his acquaintance before, came to him and ate bread with him in his house. They comforted him, and consoled him concerning all the evil that Yahweh had brought on him. Everyone also gave him a piece of money,<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and everyone a ring of gold. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="JB42_12">12&#160;</span>So Yahweh blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning. He had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, one thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand female donkeys. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_13">13&#160;</span>He had also seven sons and three daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_14">14&#160;</span>He called the name of the first, Jemimah; and the name of the second, Keziah; and the name of the third, Keren Happuch. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_15">15&#160;</span>In all the land were no women found so beautiful as the daughters of Job. Their father gave them an inheritance among their brothers. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_16">16&#160;</span>After this Job lived one hundred forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons’ sons, to four generations. 
<span class="verse" id="JB42_17">17&#160;</span>So Job died, being old and full of days. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB1_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:12</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB5_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:25</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB7_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB11_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB14_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 17:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB17_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 17:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB21_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 21:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB24_19"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:19</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 26:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB26_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 26:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Abaddon means Destroyer.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 28:16</a>
 <span class="ft">or, lapis lazuli</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB28_28"><span class="notemark">†</span> 28:28</a>
 <span class="ft">The word translated “Lord” is “Adonai.” </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB32_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 32:8</a>
 <span class="ft">or, breath</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB41_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 41:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Leviathan is a name for a crocodile or similar creature.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#JB42_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 42:11</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, kesitah, a unit of money, probably silver</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
