<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Leviticus 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Leviticus</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='LEV.xhtml#LV27_0'>27</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='LV0_0'>

<div class='mt2'>The Third Book of Moses, </div>
<div class='mt3'>Commonly Called </div>
<div class='mt'>Leviticus  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="LV1_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> called to Moses, and spoke to him from the Tent of Meeting, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘When anyone of you offers an offering to Yahweh, you shall offer your offering of the livestock, from the herd and from the flock. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_3">3&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering is a burnt offering from the herd, he shall offer a male without defect. He shall offer it at the door of the Tent of Meeting, that he may be accepted before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_4">4&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_5">5&#160;</span>He shall kill the bull before Yahweh. Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall present the blood and sprinkle the blood around on the altar that is at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_6">6&#160;</span>He shall skin the burnt offering and cut it into pieces. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_7">7&#160;</span>The sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire on the altar, and lay wood in order on the fire; 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_8">8&#160;</span>and Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall lay the pieces, the head, and the fat in order on the wood that is on the fire which is on the altar; 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_9">9&#160;</span>but he shall wash its innards and its legs with water. The priest shall burn all of it on the altar, for a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering is from the flock, from the sheep or from the goats, for a burnt offering, he shall offer a male without defect. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_11">11&#160;</span>He shall kill it on the north side of the altar before Yahweh. Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_12">12&#160;</span>He shall cut it into its pieces, with its head and its fat. The priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is on the altar, 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_13">13&#160;</span>but the innards and the legs he shall wash with water. The priest shall offer the whole, and burn it on the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV1_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering to Yahweh is a burnt offering of birds, then he shall offer his offering from turtledoves or of young pigeons. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_15">15&#160;</span>The priest shall bring it to the altar, and wring off its head, and burn it on the altar; and its blood shall be drained out on the side of the altar; 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_16">16&#160;</span>and he shall take away its crop and its feathers, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV1_17">17&#160;</span>He shall tear it by its wings, but shall not divide it apart. The priest shall burn it on the altar, on the wood that is on the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV2_0'>2</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_1">1&#160;</span>“ ‘When anyone offers an offering of a meal offering to Yahweh, his offering shall be of fine flour. He shall pour oil on it, and put frankincense on it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_2">2&#160;</span>He shall bring it to Aaron’s sons, the priests. He shall take his handful of its fine flour, and of its oil, with all its frankincense, and the priest shall burn its memorial on the altar, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_3">3&#160;</span>That which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron’s and his sons’. It is a most holy part of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘When you offer an offering of a meal offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mixed with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_5">5&#160;</span>If your offering is a meal offering made on a griddle, it shall be of unleavened fine flour, mixed with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_6">6&#160;</span>You shall cut it in pieces, and pour oil on it. It is a meal offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_7">7&#160;</span>If your offering is a meal offering of the pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_8">8&#160;</span>You shall bring the meal offering that is made of these things to Yahweh. It shall be presented to the priest, and he shall bring it to the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_9">9&#160;</span>The priest shall take from the meal offering its memorial, and shall burn it on the altar, an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_10">10&#160;</span>That which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron’s and his sons’. It is a most holy part of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘No meal offering which you shall offer to Yahweh shall be made with yeast; for you shall burn no yeast, nor any honey, as an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_12">12&#160;</span>As an offering of first fruits you shall offer them to Yahweh, but they shall not rise up as a pleasant aroma on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_13">13&#160;</span>Every offering of your meal offering you shall season with salt. You shall not allow the salt of the covenant of your God<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> to be lacking from your meal offering. With all your offerings you shall offer salt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV2_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘If you offer a meal offering of first fruits to Yahweh, you shall offer for the meal offering of your first fruits fresh heads of grain parched with fire and crushed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_15">15&#160;</span>You shall put oil on it and lay frankincense on it. It is a meal offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV2_16">16&#160;</span>The priest shall burn as its memorial part of its crushed grain and part of its oil, along with all its frankincense. It is an offering made by fire to Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV3_0'>3</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_1">1&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering is a sacrifice of peace offerings, if he offers it from the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without defect before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_2">2&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on the head of his offering, and kill it at the door of the Tent of Meeting. Aaron’s sons, the priests, shall sprinkle the blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_3">3&#160;</span>He shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Yahweh. The fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is on the innards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_4">4&#160;</span>and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the cover on the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_5">5&#160;</span>Aaron’s sons shall burn it on the altar on the burnt offering, which is on the wood that is on the fire: it is an offering made by fire, of a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering for a sacrifice of peace offerings to Yahweh is from the flock, either male or female, he shall offer it without defect. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_7">7&#160;</span>If he offers a lamb for his offering, then he shall offer it before Yahweh; 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_8">8&#160;</span>and he shall lay his hand on the head of his offering, and kill it before the Tent of Meeting. Aaron’s sons shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_9">9&#160;</span>He shall offer from the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Yahweh; its fat, the entire tail fat, he shall take away close to the backbone; and the fat that covers the entrails, and all the fat that is on the entrails, 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_10">10&#160;</span>and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the cover on the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_11">11&#160;</span>The priest shall burn it on the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_12">12&#160;</span>“ ‘If his offering is a goat, then he shall offer it before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_13">13&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on its head, and kill it before the Tent of Meeting; and the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle its blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_14">14&#160;</span>He shall offer from it as his offering, an offering made by fire to Yahweh; the fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is on the innards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_15">15&#160;</span>and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the cover on the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away. 
<span class="verse" id="LV3_16">16&#160;</span>The priest shall burn them on the altar: it is the food of the offering made by fire, for a pleasant aroma; all the fat is Yahweh’s. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV3_17">17&#160;</span>“ ‘It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings, that you shall eat neither fat nor blood.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV4_0'>4</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘If anyone sins unintentionally, in any of the things which Yahweh has commanded not to be done, and does any one of them, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_3">3&#160;</span>if the anointed priest sins so as to bring guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin which he has sinned a young bull without defect to Yahweh for a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_4">4&#160;</span>He shall bring the bull to the door of the Tent of Meeting before Yahweh; and he shall lay his hand on the head of the bull, and kill the bull before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_5">5&#160;</span>The anointed priest shall take some of the blood of the bull, and bring it to the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_6">6&#160;</span>The priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle some of the blood seven times before Yahweh, before the veil of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_7">7&#160;</span>The priest shall put some of the blood on the horns of the altar of sweet incense before Yahweh, which is in the Tent of Meeting; and he shall pour out the rest of the blood of the bull at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_8">8&#160;</span>He shall take all the fat of the bull of the sin offering from it: the fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is on the innards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_9">9&#160;</span>and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the cover on the liver, with the kidneys, he shall remove, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_10">10&#160;</span>as it is removed from the bull of the sacrifice of peace offerings. The priest shall burn them on the altar of burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_11">11&#160;</span>He shall carry the bull’s skin, all its meat, with its head, and with its legs, its innards, and its dung 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_12">12&#160;</span>—all the rest of the bull—outside of the camp to a clean place where the ashes are poured out, and burn it on wood with fire. It shall be burned where the ashes are poured out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘If the whole congregation of Israel sins, and the thing is hidden from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done any of the things which Yahweh has commanded not to be done, and are guilty; 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_14">14&#160;</span>when the sin in which they have sinned is known, then the assembly shall offer a young bull for a sin offering, and bring it before the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_15">15&#160;</span>The elders of the congregation shall lay their hands on the head of the bull before Yahweh; and the bull shall be killed before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_16">16&#160;</span>The anointed priest shall bring some of the blood of the bull to the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_17">17&#160;</span>The priest shall dip his finger in the blood and sprinkle it seven times before Yahweh, before the veil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_18">18&#160;</span>He shall put some of the blood on the horns of the altar which is before Yahweh, that is in the Tent of Meeting; and the rest of the blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_19">19&#160;</span>All its fat he shall take from it, and burn it on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_20">20&#160;</span>He shall do this with the bull; as he did with the bull of the sin offering, so he shall do with this; and the priest shall make atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_21">21&#160;</span>He shall carry the bull outside the camp, and burn it as he burned the first bull. It is the sin offering for the assembly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_22">22&#160;</span>“ ‘When a ruler sins, and unwittingly does any one of all the things which Yahweh his God has commanded not to be done, and is guilty, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_23">23&#160;</span>if his sin in which he has sinned is made known to him, he shall bring as his offering a goat, a male without defect. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_24">24&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before Yahweh. It is a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_25">25&#160;</span>The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering. He shall pour out the rest of its blood at the base of the altar of burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_26">26&#160;</span>All its fat he shall burn on the altar, like the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin, and he will be forgiven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_27">27&#160;</span>“ ‘If anyone of the common people sins unwittingly, in doing any of the things which Yahweh has commanded not to be done, and is guilty, 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_28">28&#160;</span>if his sin which he has sinned is made known to him, then he shall bring for his offering a goat, a female without defect, for his sin which he has sinned. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_29">29&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering, and kill the sin offering in the place of burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_30">30&#160;</span>The priest shall take some of its blood with his finger, and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering; and the rest of its blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_31">31&#160;</span>All its fat he shall take away, like the fat is taken away from the sacrifice of peace offerings; and the priest shall burn it on the altar for a pleasant aroma to Yahweh; and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he will be forgiven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV4_32">32&#160;</span>“ ‘If he brings a lamb as his offering for a sin offering, he shall bring a female without defect. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_33">33&#160;</span>He shall lay his hand on the head of the sin offering, and kill it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_34">34&#160;</span>The priest shall take some of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering; and all the rest of its blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV4_35">35&#160;</span>He shall remove all its fat, like the fat of the lamb is removed from the sacrifice of peace offerings. The priest shall burn them on the altar, on the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. The priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned, and he will be forgiven.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV5_0'>5</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_1">1&#160;</span>“ ‘If anyone sins, in that he hears a public adjuration to testify, he being a witness, whether he has seen or known, if he doesn’t report it, then he shall bear his iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_2">2&#160;</span>“ ‘Or if anyone touches any unclean thing, whether it is the carcass of an unclean animal, or the carcass of unclean livestock, or the carcass of unclean creeping things, and it is hidden from him, and he is unclean, then he shall be guilty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_3">3&#160;</span>“ ‘Or if he touches the uncleanness of man, whatever his uncleanness is with which he is unclean, and it is hidden from him; when he knows of it, then he shall be guilty. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘Or if anyone swears rashly with his lips to do evil or to do good—whatever it is that a man might utter rashly with an oath, and it is hidden from him—when he knows of it, then he will be guilty of one of these. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_5">5&#160;</span>It shall be, when he is guilty of one of these, he shall confess that in which he has sinned; 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_6">6&#160;</span>and he shall bring his trespass offering to Yahweh for his sin which he has sinned: a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering; and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘If he can’t afford a lamb, then he shall bring his trespass offering for that in which he has sinned, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, to Yahweh; one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_8">8&#160;</span>He shall bring them to the priest, who shall first offer the one which is for the sin offering. He shall wring off its head from its neck, but shall not sever it completely. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_9">9&#160;</span>He shall sprinkle some of the blood of the sin offering on the side of the altar; and the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_10">10&#160;</span>He shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the ordinance; and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin which he has sinned, and he shall be forgiven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘But if he can’t afford two turtledoves or two young pigeons, then he shall bring as his offering for that in which he has sinned, one tenth of an ephah<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour for a sin offering. He shall put no oil on it, and he shall not put any frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_12">12&#160;</span>He shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it as the memorial portion, and burn it on the altar, on the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. It is a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_13">13&#160;</span>The priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned in any of these things, and he will be forgiven; and the rest shall be the priest’s, as the meal offering.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_14">14&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_15">15&#160;</span>“If anyone commits a trespass, and sins unwittingly regarding Yahweh’s holy things, then he shall bring his trespass offering to Yahweh: a ram without defect from the flock, according to your estimation in silver by shekels, according to the shekel<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_16">16&#160;</span>He shall make restitution for that which he has done wrong regarding the holy thing, and shall add a fifth part to it, and give it to the priest; and the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and he will be forgiven. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV5_17">17&#160;</span>“If anyone sins, doing any of the things which Yahweh has commanded not to be done, though he didn’t know it, he is still guilty, and shall bear his iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_18">18&#160;</span>He shall bring a ram without defect from of the flock, according to your estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest; and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning the thing in which he sinned and didn’t know it, and he will be forgiven. 
<span class="verse" id="LV5_19">19&#160;</span>It is a trespass offering. He is certainly guilty before Yahweh.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV6_0'>6</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_2">2&#160;</span>“If anyone sins, and commits a trespass against Yahweh, and deals falsely with his neighbor in a matter of deposit, or of bargain, or of robbery, or has oppressed his neighbor, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_3">3&#160;</span>or has found that which was lost, and lied about it, and swearing to a lie—in any of these things that a man sins in his actions— 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_4">4&#160;</span>then it shall be, if he has sinned, and is guilty, he shall restore that which he took by robbery, or the thing which he has gotten by oppression, or the deposit which was committed to him, or the lost thing which he found, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_5">5&#160;</span>or any thing about which he has sworn falsely: he shall restore it in full, and shall add a fifth part more to it. He shall return it to him to whom it belongs in the day of his being found guilty. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_6">6&#160;</span>He shall bring his trespass offering to Yahweh: a ram without defect from the flock, according to your estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_7">7&#160;</span>The priest shall make atonement for him before Yahweh, and he will be forgiven concerning whatever he does to become guilty.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_8">8&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_9">9&#160;</span>“Command Aaron and his sons, saying, ‘This is the law of the burnt offering: the burnt offering shall be on the hearth on the altar all night until the morning; and the fire of the altar shall be kept burning on it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_10">10&#160;</span>The priest shall put on his linen garment, and he shall put on his linen trousers upon his body; and he shall remove the ashes from where the fire has consumed the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_11">11&#160;</span>He shall take off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry the ashes outside the camp to a clean place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_12">12&#160;</span>The fire on the altar shall be kept burning on it, it shall not go out; and the priest shall burn wood on it every morning. He shall lay the burnt offering in order upon it, and shall burn on it the fat of the peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_13">13&#160;</span>Fire shall be kept burning on the altar continually; it shall not go out. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘This is the law of the meal offering: the sons of Aaron shall offer it before Yahweh, before the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_15">15&#160;</span>He shall take from there his handful of the fine flour of the meal offering, and of its oil, and all the frankincense which is on the meal offering, and shall burn it on the altar for a pleasant aroma, as its memorial portion, to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_16">16&#160;</span>That which is left of it Aaron and his sons shall eat. It shall be eaten without yeast in a holy place. They shall eat it in the court of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_17">17&#160;</span>It shall not be baked with yeast. I have given it as their portion of my offerings made by fire. It is most holy, as are the sin offering and the trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_18">18&#160;</span>Every male among the children of Aaron shall eat of it, as their portion forever throughout your generations, from the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. Whoever touches them shall be holy.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_19">19&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_20">20&#160;</span>“This is the offering of Aaron and of his sons, which they shall offer to Yahweh in the day when he is anointed: one tenth of an ephah<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour for a meal offering perpetually, half of it in the morning, and half of it in the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_21">21&#160;</span>It shall be made with oil in a griddle. When it is soaked, you shall bring it in. You shall offer the meal offering in baked pieces for a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_22">22&#160;</span>The anointed priest that will be in his place from among his sons shall offer it. By a statute forever, it shall be wholly burned to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_23">23&#160;</span>Every meal offering of a priest shall be wholly burned. It shall not be eaten.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV6_24">24&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_25">25&#160;</span>“Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, ‘This is the law of the sin offering: in the place where the burnt offering is killed, the sin offering shall be killed before Yahweh. It is most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_26">26&#160;</span>The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. It shall be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_27">27&#160;</span>Whatever shall touch its flesh shall be holy. When there is any of its blood sprinkled on a garment, you shall wash that on which it was sprinkled in a holy place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_28">28&#160;</span>But the earthen vessel in which it is boiled shall be broken; and if it is boiled in a bronze vessel, it shall be scoured, and rinsed in water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_29">29&#160;</span>Every male among the priests shall eat of it. It is most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV6_30">30&#160;</span>No sin offering, of which any of the blood is brought into the Tent of Meeting to make atonement in the Holy Place, shall be eaten. It shall be burned with fire.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV7_0'>7</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_1">1&#160;</span>“ ‘This is the law of the trespass offering: It is most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_2">2&#160;</span>In the place where they kill the burnt offering, he shall kill the trespass offering; and its blood he shall sprinkle around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_3">3&#160;</span>He shall offer all of its fat: the fat tail, and the fat that covers the innards, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_4">4&#160;</span>and he shall take away the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the cover on the liver, with the kidneys; 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_5">5&#160;</span>and the priest shall burn them on the altar for an offering made by fire to Yahweh: it is a trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_6">6&#160;</span>Every male among the priests may eat of it. It shall be eaten in a holy place. It is most holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘As is the sin offering, so is the trespass offering; there is one law for them. The priest who makes atonement with them shall have it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_8">8&#160;</span>The priest who offers any man’s burnt offering shall have for himself the skin of the burnt offering which he has offered. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_9">9&#160;</span>Every meal offering that is baked in the oven, and all that is prepared in the pan and on the griddle, shall be the priest’s who offers it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_10">10&#160;</span>Every meal offering, mixed with oil or dry, belongs to all the sons of Aaron, one as well as another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘This is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which one shall offer to Yahweh: 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_12">12&#160;</span>If he offers it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mixed with oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_13">13&#160;</span>He shall offer his offering with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving with cakes of leavened bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_14">14&#160;</span>Of it he shall offer one out of each offering for a heave offering to Yahweh. It shall be the priest’s who sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_15">15&#160;</span>The flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten on the day of his offering. He shall not leave any of it until the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘But if the sacrifice of his offering is a vow, or a free will offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offers his sacrifice. On the next day what remains of it shall be eaten, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_17">17&#160;</span>but what remains of the meat of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burned with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_18">18&#160;</span>If any of the meat of the sacrifice of his peace offerings is eaten on the third day, it will not be accepted, and it shall not be credited to him who offers it. It will be an abomination, and the soul who eats any of it will bear his iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_19">19&#160;</span>“ ‘The meat that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten. It shall be burned with fire. As for the meat, everyone who is clean may eat it; 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_20">20&#160;</span>but the soul who eats of the meat of the sacrifice of peace offerings that belongs to Yahweh, having his uncleanness on him, that soul shall be cut off from his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_21">21&#160;</span>When anyone touches any unclean thing, the uncleanness of man, or an unclean animal, or any unclean abomination, and eats some of the meat of the sacrifice of peace offerings which belong to Yahweh, that soul shall be cut off from his people.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_23">23&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘You shall eat no fat, of bull, or sheep, or goat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_24">24&#160;</span>The fat of that which dies of itself, and the fat of that which is torn of animals, may be used for any other service, but you shall in no way eat of it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_25">25&#160;</span>For whoever eats the fat of the animal which men offer as an offering made by fire to Yahweh, even the soul who eats it shall be cut off from his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_26">26&#160;</span>You shall not eat any blood, whether it is of bird or of animal, in any of your dwellings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_27">27&#160;</span>Whoever it is who eats any blood, that soul shall be cut off from his people.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_28">28&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_29">29&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘He who offers the sacrifice of his peace offerings to Yahweh shall bring his offering to Yahweh out of the sacrifice of his peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_30">30&#160;</span>With his own hands he shall bring the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. He shall bring the fat with the breast, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_31">31&#160;</span>The priest shall burn the fat on the altar, but the breast shall be Aaron’s and his sons’. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_32">32&#160;</span>The right thigh you shall give to the priest for a heave offering out of the sacrifices of your peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_33">33&#160;</span>He among the sons of Aaron who offers the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_34">34&#160;</span>For the waved breast and the heaved thigh I have taken from the children of Israel out of the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as their portion forever from the children of Israel.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV7_35">35&#160;</span>This is the consecrated portion of Aaron, and the consecrated portion of his sons, out of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister to Yahweh in the priest’s office; 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_36">36&#160;</span>which Yahweh commanded to be given them of the children of Israel, in the day that he anointed them. It is their portion forever throughout their generations. 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_37">37&#160;</span>This is the law of the burnt offering, the meal offering, the sin offering, the trespass offering, the consecration, and the sacrifice of peace offerings 
<span class="verse" id="LV7_38">38&#160;</span>which Yahweh commanded Moses in Mount Sinai in the day that he commanded the children of Israel to offer their offerings to Yahweh, in the wilderness of Sinai.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV8_0'>8</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_2">2&#160;</span>“Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and the bull of the sin offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread; 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_3">3&#160;</span>and assemble all the congregation at the door of the Tent of Meeting.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_4">4&#160;</span>Moses did as Yahweh commanded him; and the congregation was assembled at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_5">5&#160;</span>Moses said to the congregation, “This is the thing which Yahweh has commanded to be done.” 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_6">6&#160;</span>Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_7">7&#160;</span>He put the tunic on him, tied the sash on him, clothed him with the robe, put the ephod on him, and he tied the skillfully woven band of the ephod on him and fastened it to him with it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_8">8&#160;</span>He placed the breastplate on him. He put the Urim and Thummim in the breastplate. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_9">9&#160;</span>He set the turban on his head. He set the golden plate, the holy crown, on the front of the turban, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_10">10&#160;</span>Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and sanctified them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_11">11&#160;</span>He sprinkled it on the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, and the basin and its base, to sanctify them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_12">12&#160;</span>He poured some of the anointing oil on Aaron’s head, and anointed him, to sanctify him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_13">13&#160;</span>Moses brought Aaron’s sons, and clothed them with tunics, and tied sashes on them, and put headbands on them, as Yahweh commanded Moses. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_14">14&#160;</span>He brought the bull of the sin offering, and Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the bull of the sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_15">15&#160;</span>He killed it; and Moses took the blood, and put it around on the horns of the altar with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar, and sanctified it, to make atonement for it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_16">16&#160;</span>He took all the fat that was on the innards, and the cover of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat; and Moses burned it on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_17">17&#160;</span>But the bull, and its skin, and its meat, and its dung, he burned with fire outside the camp, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_18">18&#160;</span>He presented the ram of the burnt offering. Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_19">19&#160;</span>He killed it; and Moses sprinkled the blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_20">20&#160;</span>He cut the ram into its pieces; and Moses burned the head, and the pieces, and the fat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_21">21&#160;</span>He washed the innards and the legs with water; and Moses burned the whole ram on the altar. It was a burnt offering for a pleasant aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Yahweh, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_22">22&#160;</span>He presented the other ram, the ram of consecration. Aaron and his sons laid their hands on the head of the ram. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_23">23&#160;</span>He killed it; and Moses took some of its blood, and put it on the tip of Aaron’s right ear, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the great toe of his right foot. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_24">24&#160;</span>He brought Aaron’s sons; and Moses put some of the blood on the tip of their right ear, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot; and Moses sprinkled the blood around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_25">25&#160;</span>He took the fat, the fat tail, all the fat that was on the innards, the cover of the liver, the two kidneys and their fat, and the right thigh; 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_26">26&#160;</span>and out of the basket of unleavened bread that was before Yahweh, he took one unleavened cake, one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat and on the right thigh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_27">27&#160;</span>He put all these in Aaron’s hands and in his sons’ hands, and waved them for a wave offering before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_28">28&#160;</span>Moses took them from their hands, and burned them on the altar on the burnt offering. They were a consecration offering for a pleasant aroma. It was an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_29">29&#160;</span>Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering before Yahweh. It was Moses’ portion of the ram of consecration, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_30">30&#160;</span>Moses took some of the anointing oil, and some of the blood which was on the altar, and sprinkled it on Aaron, on his garments, and on his sons, and on his sons’ garments with him, and sanctified Aaron, his garments, and his sons, and his sons’ garments with him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV8_31">31&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, “Boil the meat at the door of the Tent of Meeting, and there eat it and the bread that is in the basket of consecration, as I commanded, saying, ‘Aaron and his sons shall eat it.’ 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_32">32&#160;</span>What remains of the meat and of the bread you shall burn with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_33">33&#160;</span>You shall not go out from the door of the Tent of Meeting for seven days, until the days of your consecration are fulfilled: for he shall consecrate you seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_34">34&#160;</span>What has been done today, so Yahweh has commanded to do, to make atonement for you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_35">35&#160;</span>You shall stay at the door of the Tent of Meeting day and night seven days, and keep Yahweh’s command, that you don’t die: for so I am commanded.” 
<span class="verse" id="LV8_36">36&#160;</span>Aaron and his sons did all the things which Yahweh commanded by Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV9_0'>9</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_1">1&#160;</span>On the eighth day, Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_2">2&#160;</span>and he said to Aaron, “Take a calf from the herd for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, without defect, and offer them before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_3">3&#160;</span>You shall speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘Take a male goat for a sin offering; and a calf and a lamb, both a year old, without defect, for a burnt offering; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_4">4&#160;</span>and a bull and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before Yahweh; and a meal offering mixed with oil: for today Yahweh appears to you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_5">5&#160;</span>They brought what Moses commanded before the Tent of Meeting. All the congregation came near and stood before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_6">6&#160;</span>Moses said, “This is the thing which Yahweh commanded that you should do; and Yahweh’s glory shall appear to you.” 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_7">7&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron, “Draw near to the altar, and offer your sin offering, and your burnt offering, and make atonement for yourself, and for the people; and offer the offering of the people, and make atonement for them, as Yahweh commanded.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_8">8&#160;</span>So Aaron came near to the altar, and killed the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_9">9&#160;</span>The sons of Aaron presented the blood to him; and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it on the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_10">10&#160;</span>but the fat, and the kidneys, and the cover from the liver of the sin offering, he burned upon the altar, as Yahweh commanded Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_11">11&#160;</span>The meat and the skin he burned with fire outside the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_12">12&#160;</span>He killed the burnt offering; and Aaron’s sons delivered the blood to him, and he sprinkled it around on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_13">13&#160;</span>They delivered the burnt offering to him, piece by piece, and the head. He burned them upon the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_14">14&#160;</span>He washed the innards and the legs, and burned them on the burnt offering on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_15">15&#160;</span>He presented the people’s offering, and took the goat of the sin offering which was for the people, and killed it, and offered it for sin, like the first. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_16">16&#160;</span>He presented the burnt offering, and offered it according to the ordinance. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_17">17&#160;</span>He presented the meal offering, and filled his hand from there, and burned it upon the altar, in addition to the burnt offering of the morning. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_18">18&#160;</span>He also killed the bull and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the people. Aaron’s sons delivered to him the blood, which he sprinkled around on the altar; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_19">19&#160;</span>and the fat of the bull and of the ram, the fat tail, and that which covers the innards, and the kidneys, and the cover of the liver; 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_20">20&#160;</span>and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burned the fat on the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_21">21&#160;</span>Aaron waved the breasts and the right thigh for a wave offering before Yahweh, as Moses commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_22">22&#160;</span>Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people, and blessed them; and he came down from offering the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV9_23">23&#160;</span>Moses and Aaron went into the Tent of Meeting, and came out, and blessed the people; and Yahweh’s glory appeared to all the people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV9_24">24&#160;</span>Fire came out from before Yahweh, and consumed the burnt offering and the fat upon the altar. When all the people saw it, they shouted, and fell on their faces.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_1">1&#160;</span>Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, each took his censer, and put fire in it, and laid incense on it, and offered strange fire before Yahweh, which he had not commanded them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_2">2&#160;</span>Fire came out from before Yahweh, and devoured them, and they died before Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_3">3&#160;</span>Then Moses said to Aaron, “This is what Yahweh spoke of, saying, </div>
<div class='q'>‘I will show myself holy to those who come near me, </div>
<div class='q2'>and before all the people I will be glorified.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>Aaron held his peace. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_4">4&#160;</span>Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said to them, “Draw near, carry your brothers from before the sanctuary out of the camp.” 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_5">5&#160;</span>So they came near, and carried them in their tunics out of the camp, as Moses had said. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_6">6&#160;</span>Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons, “Don’t let the hair of your heads go loose, and don’t tear your clothes, so that you don’t die, and so that he will not be angry with all the congregation; but let your brothers, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which Yahweh has kindled. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_7">7&#160;</span>You shall not go out from the door of the Tent of Meeting, lest you die; for the anointing oil of Yahweh is on you.” They did according to the word of Moses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_8">8&#160;</span>Then Yahweh said to Aaron, 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_9">9&#160;</span>“You and your sons are not to drink wine or strong drink whenever you go into the Tent of Meeting, or you will die. This shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_10">10&#160;</span>You are to make a distinction between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_11">11&#160;</span>You are to teach the children of Israel all the statutes which Yahweh has spoken to them by Moses.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_12">12&#160;</span>Moses spoke to Aaron, and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons who were left, “Take the meal offering that remains of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire, and eat it without yeast beside the altar; for it is most holy; 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_13">13&#160;</span>and you shall eat it in a holy place, because it is your portion, and your sons’ portion, of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire; for so I am commanded. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_14">14&#160;</span>The waved breast and the heaved thigh you shall eat in a clean place, you, and your sons, and your daughters with you: for they are given as your portion, and your sons’ portion, out of the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_15">15&#160;</span>They shall bring the heaved thigh and the waved breast with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering before Yahweh. It shall be yours, and your sons’ with you, as a portion forever, as Yahweh has commanded.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_16">16&#160;</span>Moses diligently inquired about the goat of the sin offering, and, behold,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> it was burned. He was angry with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_17">17&#160;</span>“Why haven’t you eaten the sin offering in the place of the sanctuary, since it is most holy, and he has given it to you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before Yahweh? 
<span class="verse" id="LV10_18">18&#160;</span>Behold, its blood was not brought into the inner part of the sanctuary. You certainly should have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_19">19&#160;</span>Aaron spoke to Moses, “Behold, today they have offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before Yahweh; and such things as these have happened to me. If I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been pleasing in Yahweh’s sight?” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV10_20">20&#160;</span>When Moses heard that, it was pleasing in his sight.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV11_0'>11</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying to them, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘These are the living things which you may eat among all the animals that are on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_3">3&#160;</span>Whatever parts the hoof, and is cloven-footed, and chews the cud among the animals, that you may eat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘Nevertheless these you shall not eat of those that chew the cud, or of those who part the hoof: the camel, because it chews the cud but doesn’t have a parted hoof, is unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_5">5&#160;</span>The hyrax,<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> because it chews the cud but doesn’t have a parted hoof, is unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_6">6&#160;</span>The hare, because it chews the cud but doesn’t have a parted hoof, is unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_7">7&#160;</span>The pig, because it has a split hoof, and is cloven-footed, but doesn’t chew the cud, is unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_8">8&#160;</span>You shall not eat their meat. You shall not touch their carcasses. They are unclean to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘You may eat of all these that are in the waters: whatever has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, that you may eat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_10">10&#160;</span>All that don’t have fins and scales in the seas and rivers, all that move in the waters, and all the living creatures that are in the waters, they are an abomination to you, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_11">11&#160;</span>and you shall detest them. You shall not eat of their meat, and you shall detest their carcasses. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_12">12&#160;</span>Whatever has no fins nor scales in the waters is an abomination to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall detest these among the birds; they shall not be eaten because they are an abomination: the eagle, the vulture, the black vulture, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_14">14&#160;</span>the red kite, any kind of black kite, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_15">15&#160;</span>any kind of raven, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_16">16&#160;</span>the horned owl, the screech owl, the gull, any kind of hawk, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_17">17&#160;</span>the little owl, the cormorant, the great owl, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_18">18&#160;</span>the white owl, the desert owl, the osprey, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_19">19&#160;</span>the stork, any kind of heron, the hoopoe, and the bat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_20">20&#160;</span>“ ‘All flying insects that walk on all fours are an abomination to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_21">21&#160;</span>Yet you may eat these: of all winged creeping things that go on all fours, which have long, jointed legs for hopping on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_22">22&#160;</span>Even of these you may eat: any kind of locust, any kind of katydid, any kind of cricket, and any kind of grasshopper. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_23">23&#160;</span>But all winged creeping things which have four feet are an abomination to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_24">24&#160;</span>“ ‘By these you will become unclean: whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_25">25&#160;</span>Whoever carries any part of their carcass shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_26">26&#160;</span>“ ‘Every animal which has a split hoof that isn’t completely divided, or doesn’t chew the cud, is unclean to you. Everyone who touches them shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_27">27&#160;</span>Whatever goes on its paws, among all animals that go on all fours, they are unclean to you. Whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_28">28&#160;</span>He who carries their carcass shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. They are unclean to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘These are they which are unclean to you among the creeping things that creep on the earth: the weasel, the rat, any kind of great lizard, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_30">30&#160;</span>the gecko, and the monitor lizard, the wall lizard, the skink, and the chameleon. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_31">31&#160;</span>These are they which are unclean to you among all that creep. Whoever touches them when they are dead shall be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_32">32&#160;</span>Anything they fall on when they are dead shall be unclean; whether it is any vessel of wood, or clothing, or skin, or sack, whatever vessel it is, with which any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the evening. Then it will be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_33">33&#160;</span>Every earthen vessel into which any of them falls and all that is in it shall be unclean. You shall break it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_34">34&#160;</span>All food which may be eaten which is soaked in water shall be unclean. All drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_35">35&#160;</span>Everything whereupon part of their carcass falls shall be unclean; whether oven, or range for pots, it shall be broken in pieces. They are unclean, and shall be unclean to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_36">36&#160;</span>Nevertheless a spring or a cistern in which water is gathered shall be clean, but that which touches their carcass shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_37">37&#160;</span>If part of their carcass falls on any sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_38">38&#160;</span>But if water is put on the seed, and part of their carcass falls on it, it is unclean to you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_39">39&#160;</span>“ ‘If any animal of which you may eat dies, he who touches its carcass shall be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_40">40&#160;</span>He who eats of its carcass shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. He also who carries its carcass shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_41">41&#160;</span>“ ‘Every creeping thing that creeps on the earth is an abomination. It shall not be eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_42">42&#160;</span>Whatever goes on its belly, and whatever goes on all fours, or whatever has many feet, even all creeping things that creep on the earth, them you shall not eat; for they are an abomination. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_43">43&#160;</span>You shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creeps. You shall not make yourselves unclean with them, that you should be defiled by them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_44">44&#160;</span>For I am Yahweh your God. Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be holy; for I am holy. You shall not defile yourselves with any kind of creeping thing that moves on the earth. 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_45">45&#160;</span>For I am Yahweh who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. You shall therefore be holy, for I am holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV11_46">46&#160;</span>“ ‘This is the law of the animal, and of the bird, and of every living creature that moves in the waters, and of every creature that creeps on the earth, 
<span class="verse" id="LV11_47">47&#160;</span>to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean, and between the living thing that may be eaten and the living thing that may not be eaten.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV12_0'>12</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV12_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘If a woman conceives, and bears a male child, then she shall be unclean seven days; as in the days of her monthly period she shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_3">3&#160;</span>In the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_4">4&#160;</span>She shall continue in the blood of purification thirty-three days. She shall not touch any holy thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying are completed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_5">5&#160;</span>But if she bears a female child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her period; and she shall continue in the blood of purification sixty-six days. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV12_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘When the days of her purification are completed for a son or for a daughter, she shall bring to the priest at the door of the Tent of Meeting, a year old lamb for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon or a turtledove, for a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_7">7&#160;</span>He shall offer it before Yahweh, and make atonement for her; then she shall be cleansed from the fountain of her blood. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘This is the law for her who bears, whether a male or a female. 
<span class="verse" id="LV12_8">8&#160;</span>If she cannot afford a lamb, then she shall take two turtledoves or two young pigeons: the one for a burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering. The priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV13_0'>13</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_2">2&#160;</span>“When a man shall have a swelling in his body’s skin, or a scab, or a bright spot, and it becomes in the skin of his body the plague of leprosy, then he shall be brought to Aaron the priest or to one of his sons, the priests. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_3">3&#160;</span>The priest shall examine the plague in the skin of the body. If the hair in the plague has turned white, and the appearance of the plague is deeper than the body’s skin, it is the plague of leprosy; so the priest shall examine him and pronounce him unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_4">4&#160;</span>If the bright spot is white in the skin of his body, and its appearance isn’t deeper than the skin, and its hair hasn’t turned white, then the priest shall isolate the infected person for seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_5">5&#160;</span>The priest shall examine him on the seventh day. Behold, if in his eyes the plague is arrested and the plague hasn’t spread in the skin, then the priest shall isolate him for seven more days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_6">6&#160;</span>The priest shall examine him again on the seventh day. Behold, if the plague has faded and the plague hasn’t spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. It is a scab. He shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_7">7&#160;</span>But if the scab spreads on the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall show himself to the priest again. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_8">8&#160;</span>The priest shall examine him; and behold, if the scab has spread on the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is leprosy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_9">9&#160;</span>“When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought to the priest; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_10">10&#160;</span>and the priest shall examine him. Behold, if there is a white swelling in the skin, and it has turned the hair white, and there is raw flesh in the swelling, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_11">11&#160;</span>it is a chronic leprosy in the skin of his body, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean. He shall not isolate him, for he is already unclean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_12">12&#160;</span>“If the leprosy breaks out all over the skin, and the leprosy covers all the skin of the infected person from his head even to his feet, as far as it appears to the priest, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_13">13&#160;</span>then the priest shall examine him. Behold, if the leprosy has covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean of the plague. It has all turned white: he is clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_14">14&#160;</span>But whenever raw flesh appears in him, he shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_15">15&#160;</span>The priest shall examine the raw flesh, and pronounce him unclean: the raw flesh is unclean. It is leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_16">16&#160;</span>Or if the raw flesh turns again, and is changed to white, then he shall come to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_17">17&#160;</span>The priest shall examine him. Behold, if the plague has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him clean of the plague. He is clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_18">18&#160;</span>“When the body has a boil on its skin, and it has healed, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_19">19&#160;</span>and in the place of the boil there is a white swelling, or a bright spot, reddish-white, then it shall be shown to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_20">20&#160;</span>The priest shall examine it. Behold, if its appearance is deeper than the skin, and its hair has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is the plague of leprosy. It has broken out in the boil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_21">21&#160;</span>But if the priest examines it, and behold, there are no white hairs in it, and it isn’t deeper than the skin, but is dim, then the priest shall isolate him seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_22">22&#160;</span>If it spreads in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is a plague. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_23">23&#160;</span>But if the bright spot stays in its place, and hasn’t spread, it is the scar from the boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_24">24&#160;</span>“Or when the body has a burn from fire on its skin, and the raw flesh of the burn becomes a bright spot, reddish-white, or white, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_25">25&#160;</span>then the priest shall examine it; and behold, if the hair in the bright spot has turned white, and its appearance is deeper than the skin, it is leprosy. It has broken out in the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is the plague of leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_26">26&#160;</span>But if the priest examines it, and behold, there is no white hair in the bright spot, and it isn’t deeper than the skin, but has faded, then the priest shall isolate him seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_27">27&#160;</span>The priest shall examine him on the seventh day. If it has spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is the plague of leprosy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_28">28&#160;</span>If the bright spot stays in its place, and hasn’t spread in the skin, but is faded, it is the swelling from the burn, and the priest shall pronounce him clean, for it is the scar from the burn. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_29">29&#160;</span>“When a man or woman has a plague on the head or on the beard, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_30">30&#160;</span>then the priest shall examine the plague; and behold, if its appearance is deeper than the skin, and the hair in it is yellow and thin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is an itch. It is leprosy of the head or of the beard. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_31">31&#160;</span>If the priest examines the plague of itching, and behold, its appearance isn’t deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then the priest shall isolate the person infected with itching seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_32">32&#160;</span>On the seventh day the priest shall examine the plague; and behold, if the itch hasn’t spread, and there is no yellow hair in it, and the appearance of the itch isn’t deeper than the skin, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_33">33&#160;</span>then he shall be shaved, but he shall not shave the itch. Then the priest shall isolate the one who has the itch seven more days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_34">34&#160;</span>On the seventh day, the priest shall examine the itch; and behold, if the itch hasn’t spread in the skin, and its appearance isn’t deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. He shall wash his clothes and be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_35">35&#160;</span>But if the itch spreads in the skin after his cleansing, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_36">36&#160;</span>then the priest shall examine him; and behold, if the itch has spread in the skin, the priest shall not look for the yellow hair; he is unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_37">37&#160;</span>But if in his eyes the itch is arrested and black hair has grown in it, then the itch is healed. He is clean. The priest shall pronounce him clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_38">38&#160;</span>“When a man or a woman has bright spots in the skin of the body, even white bright spots, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_39">39&#160;</span>then the priest shall examine them. Behold, if the bright spots on the skin of their body are a dull white, it is a harmless rash. It has broken out in the skin. He is clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_40">40&#160;</span>“If a man’s hair has fallen from his head, he is bald. He is clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_41">41&#160;</span>If his hair has fallen off from the front part of his head, he is forehead bald. He is clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_42">42&#160;</span>But if a reddish-white plague is in the bald head or the bald forehead, it is leprosy breaking out in his bald head or his bald forehead. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_43">43&#160;</span>Then the priest shall examine him. Behold, if the swelling of the plague is reddish-white in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, like the appearance of leprosy in the skin of the body, 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_44">44&#160;</span>he is a leprous man. He is unclean. The priest shall surely pronounce him unclean. His plague is on his head. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_45">45&#160;</span>“The leper in whom the plague is shall wear torn clothes, and the hair of his head shall hang loose. He shall cover his upper lip, and shall cry, ‘Unclean! Unclean!’ 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_46">46&#160;</span>All the days in which the plague is in him he shall be unclean. He is unclean. He shall dwell alone. His dwelling shall be outside of the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_47">47&#160;</span>“The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it is a woolen garment, or a linen garment; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_48">48&#160;</span>whether it is in warp or woof;<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of linen or of wool; whether in a leather, or in anything made of leather; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_49">49&#160;</span>if the plague is greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the leather, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything made of leather; it is the plague of leprosy, and shall be shown to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_50">50&#160;</span>The priest shall examine the plague, and isolate the plague seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_51">51&#160;</span>He shall examine the plague on the seventh day. If the plague has spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in the skin, whatever use the skin is used for, the plague is a destructive mildew. It is unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_52">52&#160;</span>He shall burn the garment, whether the warp or the woof, in wool or in linen, or anything of leather, in which the plague is, for it is a destructive mildew. It shall be burned in the fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_53">53&#160;</span>“If the priest examines it, and behold, the plague hasn’t spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_54">54&#160;</span>then the priest shall command that they wash the thing that the plague is in, and he shall isolate it seven more days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_55">55&#160;</span>Then the priest shall examine it, after the plague is washed; and behold, if the plague hasn’t changed its color, and the plague hasn’t spread, it is unclean; you shall burn it in the fire. It is a mildewed spot, whether the bareness is inside or outside. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_56">56&#160;</span>If the priest looks, and behold, the plague has faded after it is washed, then he shall tear it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof; 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_57">57&#160;</span>and if it appears again in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is spreading. You shall burn what the plague is in with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV13_58">58&#160;</span>The garment, either the warp, or the woof, or whatever thing of skin it is, which you shall wash, if the plague has departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and it will be clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV13_59">59&#160;</span>This is the law of the plague of mildew in a garment of wool or linen, either in the warp, or the woof, or in anything of skin, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV14_0'>14</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_2">2&#160;</span>“This shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought to the priest, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_3">3&#160;</span>and the priest shall go out of the camp. The priest shall examine him. Behold, if the plague of leprosy is healed in the leper, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_4">4&#160;</span>then the priest shall command them to take for him who is to be cleansed two living clean birds, cedar wood, scarlet, and hyssop. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_5">5&#160;</span>The priest shall command them to kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_6">6&#160;</span>As for the living bird, he shall take it, the cedar wood, the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_7">7&#160;</span>He shall sprinkle on him who is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird go into the open field. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_8">8&#160;</span>“He who is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and bathe himself in water; and he shall be clean. After that he shall come into the camp, but shall dwell outside his tent seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_9">9&#160;</span>It shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows. He shall shave off all his hair. He shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his body in water. Then he shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_10">10&#160;</span>“On the eighth day he shall take two male lambs without defect, one ewe lamb a year old without defect, three tenths of an ephah<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour for a meal offering, mixed with oil, and one log<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of oil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_11">11&#160;</span>The priest who cleanses him shall set the man who is to be cleansed, and those things, before Yahweh, at the door of the Tent of Meeting. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_12">12&#160;</span>“The priest shall take one of the male lambs, and offer him for a trespass offering, with the log of oil, and wave them for a wave offering before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_13">13&#160;</span>He shall kill the male lamb in the place where they kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the place of the sanctuary; for as the sin offering is the priest’s, so is the trespass offering. It is most holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_14">14&#160;</span>The priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put it on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_15">15&#160;</span>The priest shall take some of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_16">16&#160;</span>The priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle some of the oil with his finger seven times before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_17">17&#160;</span>The priest shall put some of the rest of the oil that is in his hand on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_18">18&#160;</span>The rest of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall put on the head of him who is to be cleansed, and the priest shall make atonement for him before Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_19">19&#160;</span>“The priest shall offer the sin offering, and make atonement for him who is to be cleansed because of his uncleanness. Afterward he shall kill the burnt offering; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_20">20&#160;</span>then the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meal offering on the altar. The priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_21">21&#160;</span>“If he is poor, and can’t afford so much, then he shall take one male lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make atonement for him, and one tenth of an ephah<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of fine flour mixed with oil for a meal offering, and a log<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> of oil; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_22">22&#160;</span>and two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to afford; and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_23">23&#160;</span>“On the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing to the priest, to the door of the Tent of Meeting, before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_24">24&#160;</span>The priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_25">25&#160;</span>He shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering. The priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering and put it on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_26">26&#160;</span>The priest shall pour some of the oil into the palm of his own left hand; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_27">27&#160;</span>and the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_28">28&#160;</span>Then the priest shall put some of the oil that is in his hand on the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and on the thumb of his right hand, and on the big toe of his right foot, on the place of the blood of the trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_29">29&#160;</span>The rest of the oil that is in the priest’s hand he shall put on the head of him who is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_30">30&#160;</span>He shall offer one of the turtledoves, or of the young pigeons, which ever he is able to afford, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_31">31&#160;</span>of the kind he is able to afford, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the meal offering. The priest shall make atonement for him who is to be cleansed before Yahweh.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_32">32&#160;</span>This is the law for him in whom is the plague of leprosy, who is not able to afford the sacrifice for his cleansing. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_33">33&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_34">34&#160;</span>“When you have come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put a spreading mildew in a house in the land of your possession, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_35">35&#160;</span>then he who owns the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, ‘There seems to me to be some sort of plague in the house.’ 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_36">36&#160;</span>The priest shall command that they empty the house, before the priest goes in to examine the plague, that all that is in the house not be made unclean. Afterward the priest shall go in to inspect the house. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_37">37&#160;</span>He shall examine the plague; and behold, if the plague is in the walls of the house with hollow streaks, greenish or reddish, and it appears to be deeper than the wall, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_38">38&#160;</span>then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_39">39&#160;</span>The priest shall come again on the seventh day, and look. If the plague has spread in the walls of the house, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_40">40&#160;</span>then the priest shall command that they take out the stones in which is the plague, and cast them into an unclean place outside of the city. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_41">41&#160;</span>He shall cause the inside of the house to be scraped all over. They shall pour out the mortar that they scraped off outside of the city into an unclean place. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_42">42&#160;</span>They shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones; and he shall take other mortar, and shall plaster the house. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_43">43&#160;</span>“If the plague comes again, and breaks out in the house after he has taken out the stones, and after he has scraped the house, and after it was plastered, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_44">44&#160;</span>then the priest shall come in and look; and behold, if the plague has spread in the house, it is a destructive mildew in the house. It is unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_45">45&#160;</span>He shall break down the house, its stones, and its timber, and all the house’s mortar. He shall carry them out of the city into an unclean place. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_46">46&#160;</span>“Moreover he who goes into the house while it is shut up shall be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_47">47&#160;</span>He who lies down in the house shall wash his clothes; and he who eats in the house shall wash his clothes. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_48">48&#160;</span>“If the priest shall come in, and examine it, and behold, the plague hasn’t spread in the house, after the house was plastered, then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the plague is healed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_49">49&#160;</span>To cleanse the house he shall take two birds, cedar wood, scarlet, and hyssop. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_50">50&#160;</span>He shall kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_51">51&#160;</span>He shall take the cedar wood, the hyssop, the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times. 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_52">52&#160;</span>He shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, with the living bird, with the cedar wood, with the hyssop, and with the scarlet; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_53">53&#160;</span>but he shall let the living bird go out of the city into the open field. So shall he make atonement for the house; and it shall be clean.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV14_54">54&#160;</span>This is the law for any plague of leprosy, and for an itch, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_55">55&#160;</span>and for the destructive mildew of a garment, and for a house, 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_56">56&#160;</span>and for a swelling, and for a scab, and for a bright spot; 
<span class="verse" id="LV14_57">57&#160;</span>to teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean. </div>
<div class='p'>This is the law of leprosy.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV15_0'>15</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘When any man has a discharge from his body, because of his discharge he is unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_3">3&#160;</span>This shall be his uncleanness in his discharge: whether his body runs with his discharge, or his body has stopped from his discharge, it is his uncleanness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘Every bed on which he who has the discharge lies shall be unclean; and everything he sits on shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_5">5&#160;</span>Whoever touches his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_6">6&#160;</span>He who sits on anything on which the man who has the discharge sat shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘He who touches the body of him who has the discharge shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘If he who has the discharge spits on him who is clean, then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘Whatever saddle he who has the discharge rides on shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_10">10&#160;</span>Whoever touches anything that was under him shall be unclean until the evening. He who carries those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘Whomever he who has the discharge touches, without having rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_12">12&#160;</span>“ ‘The earthen vessel, which he who has the discharge touches, shall be broken; and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘When he who has a discharge is cleansed of his discharge, then he shall count to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes; and he shall bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘On the eighth day he shall take two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and come before Yahweh to the door of the Tent of Meeting, and give them to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_15">15&#160;</span>The priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering. The priest shall make atonement for him before Yahweh for his discharge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘If any man has an emission of semen, then he shall bathe all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_17">17&#160;</span>Every garment and every skin which the semen is on shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_18">18&#160;</span>If a man lies with a woman and there is an emission of semen, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_19">19&#160;</span>“ ‘If a woman has a discharge, and her discharge in her flesh is blood, she shall be in her impurity seven days. Whoever touches her shall be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_20">20&#160;</span>“ ‘Everything that she lies on in her impurity shall be unclean. Everything also that she sits on shall be unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_21">21&#160;</span>Whoever touches her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_22">22&#160;</span>Whoever touches anything that she sits on shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_23">23&#160;</span>If it is on the bed, or on anything she sits on, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_24">24&#160;</span>“ ‘If any man lies with her, and her monthly flow is on him, he shall be unclean seven days; and every bed he lies on shall be unclean. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_25">25&#160;</span>“ ‘If a woman has a discharge of her blood many days not in the time of her period, or if she has a discharge beyond the time of her period, all the days of the discharge of her uncleanness shall be as in the days of her period. She is unclean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_26">26&#160;</span>Every bed she lies on all the days of her discharge shall be to her as the bed of her period. Everything she sits on shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her period. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_27">27&#160;</span>Whoever touches these things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_28">28&#160;</span>“ ‘But if she is cleansed of her discharge, then she shall count to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_29">29&#160;</span>On the eighth day she shall take two turtledoves, or two young pigeons, and bring them to the priest, to the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_30">30&#160;</span>The priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make atonement for her before Yahweh for the uncleanness of her discharge. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_31">31&#160;</span>“ ‘Thus you shall separate the children of Israel from their uncleanness, so they will not die in their uncleanness when they defile my tabernacle that is among them.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV15_32">32&#160;</span>This is the law of him who has a discharge, and of him who has an emission of semen, so that he is unclean by it; 
<span class="verse" id="LV15_33">33&#160;</span>and of her who has her period, and of a man or woman who has a discharge, and of him who lies with her who is unclean.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV16_0'>16</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they came near before Yahweh, and died; 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_2">2&#160;</span>and Yahweh said to Moses, “Tell Aaron your brother not to come at just any time into the Most Holy Place within the veil, before the mercy seat which is on the ark; lest he die; for I will appear in the cloud on the mercy seat. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_3">3&#160;</span>“Aaron shall come into the sanctuary with a young bull for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_4">4&#160;</span>He shall put on the holy linen tunic. He shall have the linen trousers on his body, and shall put on the linen sash, and he shall be clothed with the linen turban. They are the holy garments. He shall bathe his body in water, and put them on. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_5">5&#160;</span>He shall take from the congregation of the children of Israel two male goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_6">6&#160;</span>“Aaron shall offer the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make atonement for himself and for his house. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_7">7&#160;</span>He shall take the two goats, and set them before Yahweh at the door of the Tent of Meeting. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_8">8&#160;</span>Aaron shall cast lots for the two goats: one lot for Yahweh, and the other lot for the scapegoat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_9">9&#160;</span>Aaron shall present the goat on which the lot fell for Yahweh, and offer him for a sin offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_10">10&#160;</span>But the goat on which the lot fell for the scapegoat shall be presented alive before Yahweh, to make atonement for him, to send him away as the scapegoat into the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_11">11&#160;</span>“Aaron shall present the bull of the sin offering, which is for himself, and shall make atonement for himself and for his house, and shall kill the bull of the sin offering which is for himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_12">12&#160;</span>He shall take a censer full of coals of fire from off the altar before Yahweh, and two handfuls of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the veil. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_13">13&#160;</span>He shall put the incense on the fire before Yahweh, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat that is on the covenant, so that he will not die. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_14">14&#160;</span>He shall take some of the blood of the bull, and sprinkle it with his finger on the mercy seat on the east; and before the mercy seat he shall sprinkle some of the blood with his finger seven times. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_15">15&#160;</span>“Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering that is for the people, and bring his blood within the veil, and do with his blood as he did with the blood of the bull, and sprinkle it on the mercy seat and before the mercy seat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_16">16&#160;</span>He shall make atonement for the Holy Place, because of the uncleanness of the children of Israel, and because of their transgressions, even all their sins; and so he shall do for the Tent of Meeting that dwells with them in the middle of their uncleanness. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_17">17&#160;</span>No one shall be in the Tent of Meeting when he enters to make atonement in the Holy Place, until he comes out, and has made atonement for himself and for his household, and for all the assembly of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_18">18&#160;</span>“He shall go out to the altar that is before Yahweh and make atonement for it, and shall take some of the bull’s blood, and some of the goat’s blood, and put it around on the horns of the altar. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_19">19&#160;</span>He shall sprinkle some of the blood on it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and make it holy from the uncleanness of the children of Israel. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_20">20&#160;</span>“When he has finished atoning for the Holy Place, the Tent of Meeting, and the altar, he shall present the live goat. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_21">21&#160;</span>Aaron shall lay both his hands on the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions, even all their sins; and he shall put them on the head of the goat, and shall send him away into the wilderness by the hand of a man who is ready. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_22">22&#160;</span>The goat shall carry all their iniquities on himself to a solitary land, and he shall release the goat in the wilderness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_23">23&#160;</span>“Aaron shall come into the Tent of Meeting, and shall take off the linen garments which he put on when he went into the Holy Place, and shall leave them there. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_24">24&#160;</span>Then he shall bathe himself in water in a holy place, put on his garments, and come out and offer his burnt offering and the burnt offering of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_25">25&#160;</span>The fat of the sin offering he shall burn on the altar. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_26">26&#160;</span>“He who lets the goat go as the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_27">27&#160;</span>The bull for the sin offering, and the goat for the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the Holy Place, shall be carried outside the camp; and they shall burn their skins, their flesh, and their dung with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_28">28&#160;</span>He who burns them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_29">29&#160;</span>“It shall be a statute to you forever: in the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, you shall afflict your souls, and shall do no kind of work, whether native-born or a stranger who lives as a foreigner among you; 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_30">30&#160;</span>for on this day shall atonement be made for you, to cleanse you. You shall be clean from all your sins before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_31">31&#160;</span>It is a Sabbath of solemn rest to you, and you shall afflict your souls. It is a statute forever. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_32">32&#160;</span>The priest, who is anointed and who is consecrated to be priest in his father’s place, shall make the atonement, and shall put on the linen garments, even the holy garments. 
<span class="verse" id="LV16_33">33&#160;</span>Then he shall make atonement for the Holy Sanctuary; and he shall make atonement for the Tent of Meeting and for the altar; and he shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV16_34">34&#160;</span>“This shall be an everlasting statute for you, to make atonement for the children of Israel once in the year because of all their sins.” </div>
<div class='p'>It was done as Yahweh commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV17_0'>17</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘This is the thing which Yahweh has commanded: 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_3">3&#160;</span>Whatever man there is of the house of Israel who kills a bull, or lamb, or goat in the camp, or who kills it outside the camp, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_4">4&#160;</span>and hasn’t brought it to the door of the Tent of Meeting to offer it as an offering to Yahweh before Yahweh’s tabernacle: blood shall be imputed to that man. He has shed blood. That man shall be cut off from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_5">5&#160;</span>This is to the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice in the open field, that they may bring them to Yahweh, to the door of the Tent of Meeting, to the priest, and sacrifice them for sacrifices of peace offerings to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_6">6&#160;</span>The priest shall sprinkle the blood on Yahweh’s altar at the door of the Tent of Meeting, and burn the fat for a pleasant aroma to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_7">7&#160;</span>They shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices to the goat idols, after which they play the prostitute. This shall be a statute forever to them throughout their generations.’ </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_8">8&#160;</span>“You shall say to them, ‘Any man there is of the house of Israel, or of the strangers who live as foreigners among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice, 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_9">9&#160;</span>and doesn’t bring it to the door of the Tent of Meeting to sacrifice it to Yahweh, that man shall be cut off from his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘Any man of the house of Israel, or of the strangers who live as foreigners among them, who eats any kind of blood, I will set my face against that soul who eats blood, and will cut him off from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_11">11&#160;</span>For the life of the flesh is in the blood. I have given it to you on the altar to make atonement for your souls; for it is the blood that makes atonement by reason of the life. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_12">12&#160;</span>Therefore I have said to the children of Israel, “No person among you may eat blood, nor may any stranger who lives as a foreigner among you eat blood.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘Whatever man there is of the children of Israel, or of the strangers who live as foreigners among them, who takes in hunting any animal or bird that may be eaten, he shall pour out its blood, and cover it with dust. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_14">14&#160;</span>For as to the life of all flesh, its blood is with its life. Therefore I said to the children of Israel, “You shall not eat the blood of any kind of flesh; for the life of all flesh is its blood. Whoever eats it shall be cut off.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV17_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘Every person that eats what dies of itself, or that which is torn by animals, whether he is native-born or a foreigner, shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening. Then he shall be clean. 
<span class="verse" id="LV17_16">16&#160;</span>But if he doesn’t wash them, or bathe his flesh, then he shall bear his iniquity.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV18_0'>18</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘I am Yahweh your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_3">3&#160;</span>You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt, where you lived. You shall not do as they do in the land of Canaan, where I am bringing you. You shall not follow their statutes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_4">4&#160;</span>You shall do my ordinances. You shall keep my statutes and walk in them. I am Yahweh your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_5">5&#160;</span>You shall therefore keep my statutes and my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘None of you shall approach any close relatives, to uncover their nakedness: I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father, nor the nakedness of your mother: she is your mother. You shall not uncover her nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife. It is your father’s nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your sister, the daughter of your father, or the daughter of your mother, whether born at home or born abroad. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your son’s daughter, or of your daughter’s daughter, even their nakedness; for theirs is your own nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s wife’s daughter, conceived by your father, since she is your sister. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_12">12&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s sister. She is your father’s near kinswoman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, for she is your mother’s near kinswoman. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your father’s brother. You shall not approach his wife. She is your aunt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your daughter-in-law. She is your son’s wife. You shall not uncover her nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your brother’s wife. It is your brother’s nakedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_17">17&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter. You shall not take her son’s daughter, or her daughter’s daughter, to uncover her nakedness. They are near kinswomen. It is wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not take a wife in addition to her sister, to be a rival, to uncover her nakedness, while her sister is still alive. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_19">19&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not approach a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is impure by her uncleanness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_20">20&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not lie carnally with your neighbor’s wife, and defile yourself with her. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_21">21&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not give any of your children as a sacrifice to Molech. You shall not profane the name of your God. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_22">22&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not lie with a man as with a woman. That is detestable. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_23">23&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not lie with any animal to defile yourself with it. No woman may give herself to an animal, to lie down with it: it is a perversion. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_24">24&#160;</span>“ ‘Don’t defile yourselves in any of these things; for in all these the nations which I am casting out before you were defiled. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_25">25&#160;</span>The land was defiled. Therefore I punished its iniquity, and the land vomited out her inhabitants. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_26">26&#160;</span>You therefore shall keep my statutes and my ordinances, and shall not do any of these abominations; neither the native-born, nor the stranger who lives as a foreigner among you 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_27">27&#160;</span>(for the men of the land that were before you had done all these abominations, and the land became defiled), 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_28">28&#160;</span>that the land not vomit you out also, when you defile it, as it vomited out the nation that was before you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV18_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘For whoever shall do any of these abominations, even the souls that do them shall be cut off from among their people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV18_30">30&#160;</span>Therefore you shall keep my requirements, that you do not practice any of these abominable customs which were practiced before you, and that you do not defile yourselves with them. I am Yahweh your God.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV19_0'>19</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to all the congregation of the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘You shall be holy; for I, Yahweh your God, am holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_3">3&#160;</span>“ ‘Each one of you shall respect his mother and his father. You shall keep my Sabbaths. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘Don’t turn to idols, nor make molten gods for yourselves. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_5">5&#160;</span>“ ‘When you offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to Yahweh, you shall offer it so that you may be accepted. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_6">6&#160;</span>It shall be eaten the same day you offer it, and on the next day. If anything remains until the third day, it shall be burned with fire. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_7">7&#160;</span>If it is eaten at all on the third day, it is an abomination. It will not be accepted; 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_8">8&#160;</span>but everyone who eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned the holy thing of Yahweh, and that soul shall be cut off from his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not wholly reap the corners of your field, neither shall you gather the gleanings of your harvest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_10">10&#160;</span>You shall not glean your vineyard, neither shall you gather the fallen grapes of your vineyard. You shall leave them for the poor and for the foreigner. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not steal. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘You shall not lie. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘You shall not deceive one another. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_12">12&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not swear by my name falsely, and profane the name of your God. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not oppress your neighbor, nor rob him. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘The wages of a hired servant shall not remain with you all night until the morning. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind; but you shall fear your God. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall do no injustice in judgment. You shall not be partial to the poor, nor show favoritism to the great; but you shall judge your neighbor in righteousness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not go around as a slanderer among your people. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘You shall not endanger the life<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of your neighbor. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_17">17&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not hate your brother in your heart. You shall surely rebuke your neighbor, and not bear sin because of him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the children of your people; but you shall love your neighbor as yourself. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_19">19&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall keep my statutes. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘You shall not cross-breed different kinds of animals. </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘You shall not sow your field with two kinds of seed; </div>
<div class='p'>“ ‘Don’t wear a garment made of two kinds of material. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_20">20&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man lies carnally with a woman who is a slave girl, pledged to be married to another man, and not ransomed or given her freedom; they shall be punished. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_21">21&#160;</span>He shall bring his trespass offering to Yahweh, to the door of the Tent of Meeting, even a ram for a trespass offering. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_22">22&#160;</span>The priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before Yahweh for his sin which he has committed; and the sin which he has committed shall be forgiven him. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_23">23&#160;</span>“ ‘When you come into the land, and have planted all kinds of trees for food, then you shall count their fruit as forbidden.<a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> For three years it shall be forbidden to you. It shall not be eaten. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_24">24&#160;</span>But in the fourth year all its fruit shall be holy, for giving praise to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_25">25&#160;</span>In the fifth year you shall eat its fruit, that it may yield its increase to you. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_26">26&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not eat any meat with the blood still in it. You shall not use enchantments, nor practice sorcery. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_27">27&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not cut the hair on the sides of your head or clip off the edge of your beard. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_28">28&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor tattoo any marks on you. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘Don’t profane your daughter, to make her a prostitute; lest the land fall to prostitution, and the land become full of wickedness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_30">30&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary; I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_31">31&#160;</span>“ ‘Don’t turn to those who are mediums, nor to the wizards. Don’t seek them out, to be defiled by them. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_32">32&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall rise up before the gray head and honor the face of the elderly; and you shall fear your God. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_33">33&#160;</span>“ ‘If a stranger lives as a foreigner with you in your land, you shall not do him wrong. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_34">34&#160;</span>The stranger who lives as a foreigner with you shall be to you as the native-born among you, and you shall love him as yourself; for you lived as foreigners in the land of Egypt. I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_35">35&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in measures of length, of weight, or of quantity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV19_36">36&#160;</span>You shall have just balances, just weights, a just ephah,<a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> and a just hin.<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> I am Yahweh your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV19_37">37&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall observe all my statutes and all my ordinances, and do them. I am Yahweh.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV20_0'>20</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_2">2&#160;</span>“Moreover, you shall tell the children of Israel, ‘Anyone of the children of Israel, or of the strangers who live as foreigners in Israel, who gives any of his offspring<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> to Molech shall surely be put to death. The people of the land shall stone that person with stones. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_3">3&#160;</span>I also will set my face against that person, and will cut him off from among his people, because he has given of his offspring to Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_4">4&#160;</span>If the people of the land all hide their eyes from that person when he gives of his offspring to Molech, and don’t put him to death, 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_5">5&#160;</span>then I will set my face against that man and against his family, and will cut him off, and all who play the prostitute after him to play the prostitute with Molech, from among their people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘The person that turns to those who are mediums and wizards, to play the prostitute after them, I will even set my face against that person, and will cut him off from among his people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘Sanctify yourselves therefore, and be holy; for I am Yahweh your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_8">8&#160;</span>You shall keep my statutes, and do them. I am Yahweh who sanctifies you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘For everyone who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death. He has cursed his father or his mother. His blood shall be upon himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘The man who commits adultery with another man’s wife, even he who commits adultery with his neighbor’s wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_11">11&#160;</span>“ ‘The man who lies with his father’s wife has uncovered his father’s nakedness. Both of them shall surely be put to death. Their blood shall be upon themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_12">12&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death. They have committed a perversion. Their blood shall be upon themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man lies with a male, as with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination. They shall surely be put to death. Their blood shall be upon themselves. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man takes a wife and her mother, it is wickedness. They shall be burned with fire, both he and they, that there may be no wickedness among you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man lies with an animal, he shall surely be put to death; and you shall kill the animal. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘If a woman approaches any animal and lies with it, you shall kill the woman and the animal. They shall surely be put to death. Their blood shall be upon them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_17">17&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man takes his sister—his father’s daughter, or his mother’s daughter—and sees her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, it is a shameful thing. They shall be cut off in the sight of the children of their people. He has uncovered his sister’s nakedness. He shall bear his iniquity. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man lies with a woman having her monthly period, and uncovers her nakedness, he has made her fountain naked, and she has uncovered the fountain of her blood. Both of them shall be cut off from among their people. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_19">19&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall not uncover the nakedness of your mother’s sister, nor of your father’s sister, for he has made his close relative naked. They shall bear their iniquity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_20">20&#160;</span>If a man lies with his uncle’s wife, he has uncovered his uncle’s nakedness. They shall bear their sin. They shall die childless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_21">21&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man takes his brother’s wife, it is an impurity. He has uncovered his brother’s nakedness. They shall be childless. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_22">22&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall therefore keep all my statutes and all my ordinances, and do them, that the land where I am bringing you to dwell may not vomit you out. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_23">23&#160;</span>You shall not walk in the customs of the nation which I am casting out before you; for they did all these things, and therefore I abhorred them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_24">24&#160;</span>But I have said to you, “You shall inherit their land, and I will give it to you to possess it, a land flowing with milk and honey.” I am Yahweh your God, who has separated you from the peoples. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_25">25&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall therefore make a distinction between the clean animal and the unclean, and between the unclean fowl and the clean. You shall not make yourselves abominable by animal, or by bird, or by anything with which the ground teems, which I have separated from you as unclean for you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV20_26">26&#160;</span>You shall be holy to me, for I, Yahweh, am holy, and have set you apart from the peoples, that you should be mine. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV20_27">27&#160;</span>“ ‘A man or a woman that is a medium or is a wizard shall surely be put to death. They shall be stoned with stones. Their blood shall be upon themselves.’ ”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV21_0'>21</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses, “Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them, ‘A priest shall not defile himself for the dead among his people, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_2">2&#160;</span>except for his relatives that are near to him: for his mother, for his father, for his son, for his daughter, for his brother, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_3">3&#160;</span>and for his virgin sister who is near to him, who has had no husband; for her he may defile himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_4">4&#160;</span>He shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people, to profane himself. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_5">5&#160;</span>“ ‘They shall not shave their heads or shave off the corners of their beards or make any cuttings in their flesh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_6">6&#160;</span>They shall be holy to their God, and not profane the name of their God, for they offer the offerings of Yahweh made by fire, the bread of their God. Therefore they shall be holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_7">7&#160;</span>“ ‘They shall not marry a woman who is a prostitute, or profane. A priest shall not marry a woman divorced from her husband; for he is holy to his God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore you shall sanctify him, for he offers the bread of your God. He shall be holy to you, for I Yahweh, who sanctify you, am holy. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘The daughter of any priest, if she profanes herself by playing the prostitute, she profanes her father. She shall be burned with fire. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘He who is the high priest among his brothers, upon whose head the anointing oil is poured, and who is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not let the hair of his head hang loose, or tear his clothes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_11">11&#160;</span>He must not go in to any dead body, or defile himself for his father or for his mother. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_12">12&#160;</span>He shall not go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God; for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘He shall take a wife in her virginity. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_14">14&#160;</span>He shall not marry a widow, or one divorced, or a woman who has been defiled, or a prostitute. He shall take a virgin of his own people as a wife. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_15">15&#160;</span>He shall not profane his offspring among his people, for I am Yahweh who sanctifies him.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_16">16&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_17">17&#160;</span>“Say to Aaron, ‘None of your offspring throughout their generations who has a defect may approach to offer the bread of his God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_18">18&#160;</span>For whatever man he is that has a defect, he shall not draw near: a blind man, or a lame, or he who has a flat nose, or any deformity, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_19">19&#160;</span>or a man who has an injured foot, or an injured hand, 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_20">20&#160;</span>or hunchbacked, or a dwarf, or one who has a defect in his eye, or an itching disease, or scabs, or who has damaged testicles. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_21">21&#160;</span>No man of the offspring of Aaron the priest who has a defect shall come near to offer the offerings of Yahweh made by fire. Since he has a defect, he shall not come near to offer the bread of his God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_22">22&#160;</span>He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV21_23">23&#160;</span>He shall not come near to the veil, nor come near to the altar, because he has a defect; that he may not profane my sanctuaries, for I am Yahweh who sanctifies them.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV21_24">24&#160;</span>So Moses spoke to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the children of Israel.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV22_0'>22</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_2">2&#160;</span>“Tell Aaron and his sons to separate themselves from the holy things of the children of Israel, which they make holy to me, and that they not profane my holy name. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_3">3&#160;</span>“Tell them, ‘If anyone of all your offspring throughout your generations approaches the holy things which the children of Israel make holy to Yahweh, having his uncleanness on him, that soul shall be cut off from before me. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘Whoever of the offspring of Aaron is a leper or has a discharge shall not eat of the holy things until he is clean. Whoever touches anything that is unclean by the dead, or a man who has a seminal emission, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_5">5&#160;</span>or whoever touches any creeping thing by which he may be made unclean, or a man from whom he may become unclean, whatever uncleanness he has— 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_6">6&#160;</span>the person that touches any such shall be unclean until the evening, and shall not eat of the holy things unless he bathes his body in water. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_7">7&#160;</span>When the sun is down, he shall be clean; and afterward he shall eat of the holy things, because it is his bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_8">8&#160;</span>He shall not eat that which dies of itself or is torn by animals, defiling himself by it. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘They shall therefore follow my commandment, lest they bear sin for it and die in it, if they profane it. I am Yahweh who sanctifies them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_10">10&#160;</span>“ ‘No stranger shall eat of the holy thing: a foreigner living with the priests, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_11">11&#160;</span>But if a priest buys a slave, purchased by his money, he shall eat of it; and those who are born in his house shall eat of his bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_12">12&#160;</span>If a priest’s daughter is married to an outsider, she shall not eat of the heave offering of the holy things. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_13">13&#160;</span>But if a priest’s daughter is a widow, or divorced, and has no child, and has returned to her father’s house as in her youth, she may eat of her father’s bread; but no stranger shall eat any of it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man eats something holy unwittingly, then he shall add the fifth part of its value to it, and shall give the holy thing to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_15">15&#160;</span>The priests shall not profane the holy things of the children of Israel, which they offer to Yahweh, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_16">16&#160;</span>and so cause them to bear the iniquity that brings guilt when they eat their holy things; for I am Yahweh who sanctifies them.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_17">17&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_18">18&#160;</span>“Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘Whoever is of the house of Israel, or of the foreigners in Israel, who offers his offering, whether it is any of their vows or any of their free will offerings, which they offer to Yahweh for a burnt offering: 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_19">19&#160;</span>that you may be accepted, you shall offer a male without defect, of the bulls, of the sheep, or of the goats. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_20">20&#160;</span>But you shall not offer whatever has a defect, for it shall not be acceptable for you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_21">21&#160;</span>Whoever offers a sacrifice of peace offerings to Yahweh to accomplish a vow, or for a free will offering of the herd or of the flock, it shall be perfect to be accepted. It shall have no defect. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_22">22&#160;</span>You shall not offer what is blind, is injured, is maimed, has a wart, is festering, or has a running sore to Yahweh, nor make an offering by fire of them on the altar to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_23">23&#160;</span>Either a bull or a lamb that has any deformity or lacking in his parts, that you may offer for a free will offering; but for a vow it shall not be accepted. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_24">24&#160;</span>You must not offer to Yahweh that which has its testicles bruised, crushed, broken, or cut. You must not do this in your land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_25">25&#160;</span>You must not offer any of these as the bread of your God from the hand of a foreigner, because their corruption is in them. There is a defect in them. They shall not be accepted for you.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_26">26&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_27">27&#160;</span>“When a bull, a sheep, or a goat is born, it shall remain seven days with its mother. From the eighth day on it shall be accepted for the offering of an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_28">28&#160;</span>Whether it is a cow or ewe, you shall not kill it and its young both in one day. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_29">29&#160;</span>“When you sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving to Yahweh, you shall sacrifice it so that you may be accepted. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_30">30&#160;</span>It shall be eaten on the same day; you shall leave none of it until the morning. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV22_31">31&#160;</span>“Therefore you shall keep my commandments, and do them. I am Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_32">32&#160;</span>You shall not profane my holy name, but I will be made holy among the children of Israel. I am Yahweh who makes you holy, 
<span class="verse" id="LV22_33">33&#160;</span>who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I am Yahweh.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV23_0'>23</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘The set feasts of Yahweh, which you shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my set feasts. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_3">3&#160;</span>“ ‘Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day is a Sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation; you shall do no kind of work. It is a Sabbath to Yahweh in all your dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_4">4&#160;</span>“ ‘These are the set feasts of Yahweh, even holy convocations, which you shall proclaim in their appointed season. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_5">5&#160;</span>In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the evening, is Yahweh’s Passover. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_6">6&#160;</span>On the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread to Yahweh. Seven days you shall eat unleavened bread. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_7">7&#160;</span>In the first day you shall have a holy convocation. You shall do no regular work. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_8">8&#160;</span>But you shall offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh seven days. In the seventh day is a holy convocation. You shall do no regular work.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_9">9&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_10">10&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘When you have come into the land which I give to you, and shall reap its harvest, then you shall bring the sheaf of the first fruits of your harvest to the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_11">11&#160;</span>He shall wave the sheaf before Yahweh, to be accepted for you. On the next day after the Sabbath the priest shall wave it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_12">12&#160;</span>On the day when you wave the sheaf, you shall offer a male lamb without defect a year old for a burnt offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_13">13&#160;</span>The meal offering with it shall be two tenths of an ephah<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of fine flour mixed with oil, an offering made by fire to Yahweh for a pleasant aroma; and the drink offering with it shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_14">14&#160;</span>You must not eat bread, or roasted grain, or fresh grain, until this same day, until you have brought the offering of your God. This is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_15">15&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall count from the next day after the Sabbath, from the day that you brought the sheaf of the wave offering: seven Sabbaths shall be completed. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_16">16&#160;</span>The next day after the seventh Sabbath you shall count fifty days; and you shall offer a new meal offering to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_17">17&#160;</span>You shall bring out of your habitations two loaves of bread for a wave offering made of two tenths of an ephah<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of fine flour. They shall be baked with yeast, for first fruits to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_18">18&#160;</span>You shall present with the bread seven lambs without defect a year old, one young bull, and two rams. They shall be a burnt offering to Yahweh, with their meal offering and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of a sweet aroma to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_19">19&#160;</span>You shall offer one male goat for a sin offering, and two male lambs a year old for a sacrifice of peace offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_20">20&#160;</span>The priest shall wave them with the bread of the first fruits for a wave offering before Yahweh, with the two lambs. They shall be holy to Yahweh for the priest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_21">21&#160;</span>You shall make proclamation on the same day that there shall be a holy convocation to you. You shall do no regular work. This is a statute forever in all your dwellings throughout your generations. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_22">22&#160;</span>“ ‘When you reap the harvest of your land, you must not wholly reap into the corners of your field. You must not gather the gleanings of your harvest. You must leave them for the poor and for the foreigner. I am Yahweh your God.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_24">24&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, there shall be a solemn rest for you, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, a holy convocation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_25">25&#160;</span>You shall do no regular work. You shall offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_26">26&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_27">27&#160;</span>“However on the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement. It shall be a holy convocation to you. You shall afflict yourselves and you shall offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_28">28&#160;</span>You shall do no kind of work in that same day, for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before Yahweh your God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_29">29&#160;</span>For whoever it is who shall not deny himself in that same day shall be cut off from his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_30">30&#160;</span>Whoever does any kind of work in that same day, I will destroy that person from among his people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_31">31&#160;</span>You shall do no kind of work: it is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_32">32&#160;</span>It shall be a Sabbath of solemn rest for you, and you shall deny yourselves. In the ninth day of the month at evening, from evening to evening, you shall keep your Sabbath.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_33">33&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_34">34&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and say, ‘On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the feast of booths<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> for seven days to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_35">35&#160;</span>On the first day shall be a holy convocation. You shall do no regular work. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_36">36&#160;</span>Seven days you shall offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh. On the eighth day shall be a holy convocation to you. You shall offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh. It is a solemn assembly; you shall do no regular work. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_37">37&#160;</span>“ ‘These are the appointed feasts of Yahweh which you shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire to Yahweh, a burnt offering, a meal offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, each on its own day— 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_38">38&#160;</span>in addition to the Sabbaths of Yahweh, and in addition to your gifts, and in addition to all your vows, and in addition to all your free will offerings, which you give to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_39">39&#160;</span>“ ‘So on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when you have gathered in the fruits of the land, you shall keep the feast of Yahweh seven days. On the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_40">40&#160;</span>You shall take on the first day the fruit of majestic trees, branches of palm trees, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook; and you shall rejoice before Yahweh your God seven days. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_41">41&#160;</span>You shall keep it as a feast to Yahweh seven days in the year. It is a statute forever throughout your generations. You shall keep it in the seventh month. 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_42">42&#160;</span>You shall dwell in temporary shelters<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> for seven days. All who are native-born in Israel shall dwell in temporary shelters,<a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> 
<span class="verse" id="LV23_43">43&#160;</span>that your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to dwell in temporary shelters<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am Yahweh your God.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV23_44">44&#160;</span>So Moses declared to the children of Israel the appointed feasts of Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV24_0'>24</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_2">2&#160;</span>“Command the children of Israel, that they bring to you pure olive oil beaten for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_3">3&#160;</span>Outside of the veil of the Testimony, in the Tent of Meeting, Aaron shall keep it in order from evening to morning before Yahweh continually. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_4">4&#160;</span>He shall keep in order the lamps on the pure gold lamp stand before Yahweh continually. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_5">5&#160;</span>“You shall take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes of it: two tenths of an ephah<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> shall be in one cake. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_6">6&#160;</span>You shall set them in two rows, six on a row, on the pure gold table before Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_7">7&#160;</span>You shall put pure frankincense on each row, that it may be to the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_8">8&#160;</span>Every Sabbath day he shall set it in order before Yahweh continually. It is an everlasting covenant on the behalf of the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_9">9&#160;</span>It shall be for Aaron and his sons. They shall eat it in a holy place; for it is most holy to him of the offerings of Yahweh made by fire by a perpetual statute.” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_10">10&#160;</span>The son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the children of Israel; and the son of the Israelite woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_11">11&#160;</span>The son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name, and cursed; and they brought him to Moses. His mother’s name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_12">12&#160;</span>They put him in custody until Yahweh’s will should be declared to them. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_13">13&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_14">14&#160;</span>“Bring him who cursed out of the camp; and let all who heard him lay their hands on his head, and let all the congregation stone him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_15">15&#160;</span>You shall speak to the children of Israel, saying, ‘Whoever curses his God shall bear his sin. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_16">16&#160;</span>He who blasphemes Yahweh’s name, he shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall certainly stone him. The foreigner as well as the native-born shall be put to death when he blasphemes the Name. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_17">17&#160;</span>“ ‘He who strikes any man mortally shall surely be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_18">18&#160;</span>He who strikes an animal mortally shall make it good, life for life. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_19">19&#160;</span>If anyone injures his neighbor, it shall be done to him as he has done: 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_20">20&#160;</span>fracture for fracture, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. It shall be done to him as he has injured someone. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_21">21&#160;</span>He who kills an animal shall make it good; and he who kills a man shall be put to death. 
<span class="verse" id="LV24_22">22&#160;</span>You shall have one kind of law for the foreigner as well as the native-born; for I am Yahweh your God.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV24_23">23&#160;</span>Moses spoke to the children of Israel; and they brought him who had cursed out of the camp, and stoned him with stones. The children of Israel did as Yahweh commanded Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh said to Moses on Mount Sinai, 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and tell them, ‘When you come into the land which I give you, then the land shall keep a Sabbath to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_3">3&#160;</span>You shall sow your field six years, and you shall prune your vineyard six years, and gather in its fruits; 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_4">4&#160;</span>but in the seventh year there shall be a Sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a Sabbath to Yahweh. You shall not sow your field or prune your vineyard. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_5">5&#160;</span>What grows of itself in your harvest you shall not reap, and you shall not gather the grapes of your undressed vine. It shall be a year of solemn rest for the land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_6">6&#160;</span>The Sabbath of the land shall be for food for you; for yourself, for your servant, for your maid, for your hired servant, and for your stranger, who lives as a foreigner with you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_7">7&#160;</span>For your livestock also, and for the animals that are in your land, shall all its increase be for food. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_8">8&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall count off seven Sabbaths of years, seven times seven years; and there shall be to you the days of seven Sabbaths of years, even forty-nine years. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_9">9&#160;</span>Then you shall sound the loud trumpet on the tenth day of the seventh month. On the Day of Atonement you shall sound the trumpet throughout all your land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_10">10&#160;</span>You shall make the fiftieth year holy, and proclaim liberty throughout the land to all its inhabitants. It shall be a jubilee to you; and each of you shall return to his own property, and each of you shall return to his family. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_11">11&#160;</span>That fiftieth year shall be a jubilee to you. In it you shall not sow, neither reap that which grows of itself, nor gather from the undressed vines. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_12">12&#160;</span>For it is a jubilee; it shall be holy to you. You shall eat of its increase out of the field. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_13">13&#160;</span>“ ‘In this Year of Jubilee each of you shall return to his property. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘If you sell anything to your neighbor, or buy from your neighbor, you shall not wrong one another. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_15">15&#160;</span>According to the number of years after the Jubilee you shall buy from your neighbor. According to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_16">16&#160;</span>According to the length of the years you shall increase its price, and according to the shortness of the years you shall diminish its price; for he is selling the number of the crops to you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_17">17&#160;</span>You shall not wrong one another, but you shall fear your God; for I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘Therefore you shall do my statutes, and keep my ordinances and do them; and you shall dwell in the land in safety. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_19">19&#160;</span>The land shall yield its fruit, and you shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safety. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_20">20&#160;</span>If you said, “What shall we eat the seventh year? Behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase;” 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_21">21&#160;</span>then I will command my blessing on you in the sixth year, and it shall bear fruit for the three years. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_22">22&#160;</span>You shall sow the eighth year, and eat of the fruits from the old store until the ninth year. Until its fruits come in, you shall eat the old store. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_23">23&#160;</span>“ ‘The land shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is mine; for you are strangers and live as foreigners with me. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_24">24&#160;</span>In all the land of your possession you shall grant a redemption for the land. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_25">25&#160;</span>“ ‘If your brother becomes poor, and sells some of his possessions, then his kinsman who is next to him shall come, and redeem that which his brother has sold. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_26">26&#160;</span>If a man has no one to redeem it, and he becomes prosperous and finds sufficient means to redeem it, 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_27">27&#160;</span>then let him reckon the years since its sale, and restore the surplus to the man to whom he sold it; and he shall return to his property. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_28">28&#160;</span>But if he isn’t able to get it back for himself, then what he has sold shall remain in the hand of him who has bought it until the Year of Jubilee. In the Jubilee it shall be released, and he shall return to his property. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man sells a dwelling house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it has been sold. For a full year he shall have the right of redemption. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_30">30&#160;</span>If it isn’t redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him who bought it, throughout his generations. It shall not be released in the Jubilee. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_31">31&#160;</span>But the houses of the villages which have no wall around them shall be accounted for with the fields of the country: they may be redeemed, and they shall be released in the Jubilee. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_32">32&#160;</span>“ ‘Nevertheless, in the cities of the Levites, the Levites may redeem the houses in the cities of their possession at any time. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_33">33&#160;</span>The Levites may redeem the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, and it shall be released in the Jubilee; for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the children of Israel. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_34">34&#160;</span>But the field of the pasture lands of their cities may not be sold, for it is their perpetual possession. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_35">35&#160;</span>“ ‘If your brother has become poor, and his hand can’t support himself among you, then you shall uphold him. He shall live with you like an alien and a temporary resident. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_36">36&#160;</span>Take no interest from him or profit; but fear your God, that your brother may live among you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_37">37&#160;</span>You shall not lend him your money at interest, nor give him your food for profit. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_38">38&#160;</span>I am Yahweh your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_39">39&#160;</span>“ ‘If your brother has grown poor among you, and sells himself to you, you shall not make him to serve as a slave. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_40">40&#160;</span>As a hired servant, and as a temporary resident, he shall be with you; he shall serve with you until the Year of Jubilee. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_41">41&#160;</span>Then he shall go out from you, he and his children with him, and shall return to his own family, and to the possession of his fathers. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_42">42&#160;</span>For they are my servants, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. They shall not be sold as slaves. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_43">43&#160;</span>You shall not rule over him with harshness, but shall fear your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_44">44&#160;</span>“ ‘As for your male and your female slaves, whom you may have from the nations that are around you, from them you may buy male and female slaves. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_45">45&#160;</span>Moreover, of the children of the aliens who live among you, of them you may buy, and of their families who are with you, which they have conceived in your land; and they will be your property. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_46">46&#160;</span>You may make them an inheritance for your children after you, to hold for a possession. Of them you may take your slaves forever, but over your brothers the children of Israel you shall not rule, one over another, with harshness. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV25_47">47&#160;</span>“ ‘If an alien or temporary resident with you becomes rich, and your brother beside him has grown poor, and sells himself to the stranger or foreigner living among you, or to a member of the stranger’s family, 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_48">48&#160;</span>after he is sold he may be redeemed. One of his brothers may redeem him; 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_49">49&#160;</span>or his uncle, or his uncle’s son, may redeem him, or any who is a close relative to him of his family may redeem him; or if he has grown rich, he may redeem himself. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_50">50&#160;</span>He shall reckon with him who bought him from the year that he sold himself to him to the Year of Jubilee. The price of his sale shall be according to the number of years; he shall be with him according to the time of a hired servant. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_51">51&#160;</span>If there are yet many years, according to them he shall give back the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_52">52&#160;</span>If there remain but a few years to the year of jubilee, then he shall reckon with him; according to his years of service he shall give back the price of his redemption. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_53">53&#160;</span>As a servant hired year by year shall he be with him. He shall not rule with harshness over him in your sight. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_54">54&#160;</span>If he isn’t redeemed by these means, then he shall be released in the Year of Jubilee: he and his children with him. 
<span class="verse" id="LV25_55">55&#160;</span>For to me the children of Israel are servants; they are my servants whom I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am Yahweh your God.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV26_0'>26</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_1">1&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall make for yourselves no idols, and you shall not raise up a carved image or a pillar, and you shall not place any figured stone in your land, to bow down to it; for I am Yahweh your God. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_2">2&#160;</span>“ ‘You shall keep my Sabbaths, and have reverence for my sanctuary. I am Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_3">3&#160;</span>“ ‘If you walk in my statutes and keep my commandments, and do them, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_4">4&#160;</span>then I will give you your rains in their season, and the land shall yield its increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_5">5&#160;</span>Your threshing shall continue until the vintage, and the vintage shall continue until the sowing time. You shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_6">6&#160;</span>“ ‘I will give peace in the land, and you shall lie down, and no one will make you afraid. I will remove evil animals out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_7">7&#160;</span>You shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_8">8&#160;</span>Five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall chase ten thousand; and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘I will have respect for you, make you fruitful, multiply you, and will establish my covenant with you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_10">10&#160;</span>You shall eat old supplies long kept, and you shall move out the old because of the new. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_11">11&#160;</span>I will set my tent among you, and my soul won’t abhor you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_12">12&#160;</span>I will walk among you, and will be your God, and you will be my people. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_13">13&#160;</span>I am Yahweh your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that you should not be their slaves. I have broken the bars of your yoke, and made you walk upright. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘But if you will not listen to me, and will not do all these commandments, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_15">15&#160;</span>and if you shall reject my statutes, and if your soul abhors my ordinances, so that you will not do all my commandments, but break my covenant, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_16">16&#160;</span>I also will do this to you: I will appoint terror over you, even consumption and fever, that shall consume the eyes, and make the soul to pine away. You will sow your seed in vain, for your enemies will eat it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_17">17&#160;</span>I will set my face against you, and you will be struck before your enemies. Those who hate you will rule over you; and you will flee when no one pursues you. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_18">18&#160;</span>“ ‘If you in spite of these things will not listen to me, then I will chastise you seven times more for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_19">19&#160;</span>I will break the pride of your power, and I will make your sky like iron, and your soil like bronze. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_20">20&#160;</span>Your strength will be spent in vain; for your land won’t yield its increase, neither will the trees of the land yield their fruit. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_21">21&#160;</span>“ ‘If you walk contrary to me, and won’t listen to me, then I will bring seven times more plagues on you according to your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_22">22&#160;</span>I will send the wild animals among you, which will rob you of your children, destroy your livestock, and make you few in number. Your roads will become desolate. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_23">23&#160;</span>“ ‘If by these things you won’t be turned back to me, but will walk contrary to me, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_24">24&#160;</span>then I will also walk contrary to you; and I will strike you, even I, seven times for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_25">25&#160;</span>I will bring a sword upon you that will execute the vengeance of the covenant. You will be gathered together within your cities, and I will send the pestilence among you. You will be delivered into the hand of the enemy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_26">26&#160;</span>When I break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight. You shall eat, and not be satisfied. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_27">27&#160;</span>“ ‘If you in spite of this won’t listen to me, but walk contrary to me, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_28">28&#160;</span>then I will walk contrary to you in wrath. I will also chastise you seven times for your sins. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_29">29&#160;</span>You will eat the flesh of your sons, and you will eat the flesh of your daughters. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_30">30&#160;</span>I will destroy your high places, and cut down your incense altars, and cast your dead bodies upon the bodies of your idols; and my soul will abhor you. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_31">31&#160;</span>I will lay your cities waste, and will bring your sanctuaries to desolation. I will not take delight in the sweet fragrance of your offerings. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_32">32&#160;</span>I will bring the land into desolation, and your enemies who dwell in it will be astonished at it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_33">33&#160;</span>I will scatter you among the nations, and I will draw out the sword after you. Your land will be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_34">34&#160;</span>Then the land will enjoy its Sabbaths as long as it lies desolate and you are in your enemies’ land. Even then the land will rest and enjoy its Sabbaths. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_35">35&#160;</span>As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest, even the rest which it didn’t have in your Sabbaths when you lived on it. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_36">36&#160;</span>“ ‘As for those of you who are left, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the lands of their enemies. The sound of a driven leaf will put them to flight; and they shall flee, as one flees from the sword. They will fall when no one pursues. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_37">37&#160;</span>They will stumble over one another, as it were before the sword, when no one pursues. You will have no power to stand before your enemies. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_38">38&#160;</span>You will perish among the nations. The land of your enemies will eat you up. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_39">39&#160;</span>Those of you who are left will pine away in their iniquity in your enemies’ lands; and also in the iniquities of their fathers they shall pine away with them. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_40">40&#160;</span>“ ‘If they confess their iniquity and the iniquity of their fathers, in their trespass which they trespassed against me; and also that because they walked contrary to me, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_41">41&#160;</span>I also walked contrary to them, and brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their uncircumcised heart is humbled, and they then accept the punishment of their iniquity, 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_42">42&#160;</span>then I will remember my covenant with Jacob, my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham; and I will remember the land. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_43">43&#160;</span>The land also will be left by them, and will enjoy its Sabbaths while it lies desolate without them; and they will accept the punishment of their iniquity because they rejected my ordinances, and their soul abhorred my statutes. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_44">44&#160;</span>Yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly and to break my covenant with them; for I am Yahweh their God. 
<span class="verse" id="LV26_45">45&#160;</span>But I will for their sake remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God. I am Yahweh.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV26_46">46&#160;</span>These are the statutes, ordinances, and laws, which Yahweh made between him and the children of Israel in Mount Sinai by Moses.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='LV27_0'>27</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_1">1&#160;</span>Yahweh spoke to Moses, saying, 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_2">2&#160;</span>“Speak to the children of Israel, and say to them, ‘When a man consecrates a person to Yahweh in a vow, according to your valuation, 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_3">3&#160;</span>your valuation of a male from twenty years old to sixty years old shall be fifty shekels of silver, according to the shekel<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of the sanctuary. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_4">4&#160;</span>If she is a female, then your valuation shall be thirty shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_5">5&#160;</span>If the person is from five years old to twenty years old, then your valuation shall be for a male twenty shekels, and for a female ten shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_6">6&#160;</span>If the person is from a month old to five years old, then your valuation shall be for a male five shekels of silver, and for a female your valuation shall be three shekels of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_7">7&#160;</span>If the person is from sixty years old and upward; if he is a male, then your valuation shall be fifteen shekels, and for a female ten shekels. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_8">8&#160;</span>But if he is poorer than your valuation, then he shall be set before the priest, and the priest shall assign a value to him. The priest shall assign a value according to his ability to pay. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_9">9&#160;</span>“ ‘If it is an animal of which men offer an offering to Yahweh, all that any man gives of such to Yahweh becomes holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_10">10&#160;</span>He shall not alter it, nor exchange it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good. If he shall at all exchange animal for animal, then both it and that for which it is exchanged shall be holy. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_11">11&#160;</span>If it is any unclean animal, of which they do not offer as an offering to Yahweh, then he shall set the animal before the priest; 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_12">12&#160;</span>and the priest shall evaluate it, whether it is good or bad. As the priest evaluates it, so it shall be. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_13">13&#160;</span>But if he will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of it to its valuation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_14">14&#160;</span>“ ‘When a man dedicates his house to be holy to Yahweh, then the priest shall evaluate it, whether it is good or bad. As the priest evaluates it, so it shall stand. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_15">15&#160;</span>If he who dedicates it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of your valuation to it, and it shall be his. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_16">16&#160;</span>“ ‘If a man dedicates to Yahweh part of the field of his possession, then your valuation shall be according to the seed for it. The sowing of a homer<a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> of barley shall be valued at fifty shekels<a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> of silver. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_17">17&#160;</span>If he dedicates his field from the Year of Jubilee, according to your valuation it shall stand. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_18">18&#160;</span>But if he dedicates his field after the Jubilee, then the priest shall reckon to him the money according to the years that remain to the Year of Jubilee; and an abatement shall be made from your valuation. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_19">19&#160;</span>If he who dedicated the field will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of your valuation to it, and it shall remain his. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_20">20&#160;</span>If he will not redeem the field, or if he has sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more; 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_21">21&#160;</span>but the field, when it goes out in the Jubilee, shall be holy to Yahweh, as a devoted field. It shall be owned by the priests. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_22">22&#160;</span>“ ‘If he dedicates a field to Yahweh which he has bought, which is not of the field of his possession, 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_23">23&#160;</span>then the priest shall reckon to him the worth of your valuation up to the Year of Jubilee; and he shall give your valuation on that day, as a holy thing to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_24">24&#160;</span>In the Year of Jubilee the field shall return to him from whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land belongs. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_25">25&#160;</span>All your valuations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary: twenty gerahs<a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> to the shekel.<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_26">26&#160;</span>“ ‘However the firstborn among animals, which belongs to Yahweh as a firstborn, no man may dedicate, whether an ox or a sheep. It is Yahweh’s. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_27">27&#160;</span>If it is an unclean animal, then he shall buy it back according to your valuation, and shall add to it the fifth part of it; or if it isn’t redeemed, then it shall be sold according to your valuation. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_28">28&#160;</span>“ ‘Notwithstanding, no devoted thing that a man devotes to Yahweh of all that he has, whether of man or animal, or of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed. Everything that is permanently devoted is most holy to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_29">29&#160;</span>“ ‘No one devoted to destruction, who shall be devoted from among men, shall be ransomed. He shall surely be put to death. </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_30">30&#160;</span>“ ‘All the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land or of the fruit of the trees, is Yahweh’s. It is holy to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_31">31&#160;</span>If a man redeems anything of his tithe, he shall add a fifth part to it. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_32">32&#160;</span>All the tithe of the herds or the flocks, whatever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy to Yahweh. 
<span class="verse" id="LV27_33">33&#160;</span>He shall not examine whether it is good or bad, neither shall he exchange it. If he exchanges it at all, then both it and that for which it is exchanged shall be holy. It shall not be redeemed.’ ” </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="LV27_34">34&#160;</span>These are the commandments which Yahweh commanded Moses for the children of Israel on Mount Sinai. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV2_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:13</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV5_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:11</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV5_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:15</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV6_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:20</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV10_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:16</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV11_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:5</a>
 <span class="ft">or rock badger, or cony</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV13_48"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:48</a>
 <span class="ft">warp and woof are the vertical and horizontal threads in woven cloth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV14_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:10</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV14_10"><span class="notemark">†</span> 14:10</a>
 <span class="ft">a log is a liquid measure of about 300 ml or 10 ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV14_21"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 14:21</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV14_21"><span class="notemark">§</span> 14:21</a>
 <span class="ft">a log is a liquid measure of about 300 ml or 10 ounces</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV19_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 19:16</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, “blood”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV19_23"><span class="notemark">†</span> 19:23</a>
 <span class="ft">literally, “uncircumcised”</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV19_36"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 19:36</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV19_36"><span class="notemark">§</span> 19:36</a>
 <span class="ft">A hin is about 6.5 liters or 1.7 gallons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV20_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 20:2</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:13</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_13"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:13</a>
 <span class="ft">A hin is about 6.5 liters or 1.7 gallons.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_17"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23:17</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_34"><span class="notemark">§</span> 23:34</a>
 <span class="ft">or, feast of tents, or Succoth</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_42"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:42</a>
 <span class="ft">or, booths</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_42"><span class="notemark">†</span> 23:42</a>
 <span class="ft">or, booths</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV23_43"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 23:43</a>
 <span class="ft">or, booths</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV24_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 24:5</a>
 <span class="ft">1 ephah is about 22 liters or about 2/3 of a bushel</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV27_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:3</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV27_16"><span class="notemark">†</span> 27:16</a>
 <span class="ft">1 homer is about 220 liters or 6 bushels</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV27_16"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 27:16</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV27_25"><span class="notemark">§</span> 27:25</a>
 <span class="ft">A gerah is about 0.5 grams or about 7.7 grains.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#LV27_25"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:25</a>
 <span class="ft">A shekel is about 10 grams or about 0.35 ounces.</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
