<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Proverbs 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Proverbs</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR19_0'>19</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR20_0'>20</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR21_0'>21</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR22_0'>22</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR23_0'>23</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR24_0'>24</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR25_0'>25</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR26_0'>26</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR27_0'>27</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR28_0'>28</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR29_0'>29</a></li>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR30_0'>30</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_0'>31</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='PR0_0'>

<div class='mt'>The Proverbs  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR1_0'>1</div>
<div class='p'>

<span class="verse" id="PR1_1">1&#160;</span>The proverbs of Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_2">2&#160;</span>to know wisdom and instruction; </div>
<div class='q2'>to discern the words of understanding; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_3">3&#160;</span>to receive instruction in wise dealing, </div>
<div class='q2'>in righteousness, justice, and equity; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_4">4&#160;</span>to give prudence to the simple, </div>
<div class='q2'>knowledge and discretion to the young man— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_5">5&#160;</span>that the wise man may hear, and increase in learning; </div>
<div class='q2'>that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsel; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_6">6&#160;</span>to understand a proverb and parables, </div>
<div class='q2'>the words and riddles of the wise. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_7">7&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> is the beginning of knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the foolish despise wisdom and instruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_8">8&#160;</span>My son, listen to your father’s instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t forsake your mother’s teaching; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_9">9&#160;</span>for they will be a garland to grace your head, </div>
<div class='q2'>and chains around your neck. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_10">10&#160;</span>My son, if sinners entice you, </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t consent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_11">11&#160;</span>If they say, “Come with us. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s lie in wait for blood. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s lurk secretly for the innocent without cause. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_12">12&#160;</span>Let’s swallow them up alive like Sheol,<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>and whole, like those who go down into the pit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_13">13&#160;</span>We’ll find all valuable wealth. </div>
<div class='q2'>We’ll fill our houses with plunder. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_14">14&#160;</span>You shall cast your lot among us. </div>
<div class='q2'>We’ll all have one purse”— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_15">15&#160;</span>my son, don’t walk on the path with them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep your foot from their path, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_16">16&#160;</span>for their feet run to evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>They hurry to shed blood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_17">17&#160;</span>For the net is spread in vain in the sight of any bird; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_18">18&#160;</span>but these lay in wait for their own blood. </div>
<div class='q2'>They lurk secretly for their own lives. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_19">19&#160;</span>So are the ways of everyone who is greedy for gain. </div>
<div class='q2'>It takes away the life of its owners. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_20">20&#160;</span>Wisdom calls aloud in the street. </div>
<div class='q2'>She utters her voice in the public squares. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_21">21&#160;</span>She calls at the head of noisy places. </div>
<div class='q2'>At the entrance of the city gates, she utters her words: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_22">22&#160;</span>“How long, you simple ones, will you love simplicity? </div>
<div class='q2'>How long will mockers delight themselves in mockery, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fools hate knowledge? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_23">23&#160;</span>Turn at my reproof. </div>
<div class='q2'>Behold,<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> I will pour out my spirit on you. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will make known my words to you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_24">24&#160;</span>Because I have called, and you have refused; </div>
<div class='q2'>I have stretched out my hand, and no one has paid attention; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_25">25&#160;</span>but you have ignored all my counsel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wanted none of my reproof; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_26">26&#160;</span>I also will laugh at your disaster. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will mock when calamity overtakes you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_27">27&#160;</span>when calamity overtakes you like a storm, </div>
<div class='q2'>when your disaster comes on like a whirlwind, </div>
<div class='q2'>when distress and anguish come on you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_28">28&#160;</span>Then they will call on me, but I will not answer. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will seek me diligently, but they will not find me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_29">29&#160;</span>because they hated knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and didn’t choose the fear of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_30">30&#160;</span>They wanted none of my counsel. </div>
<div class='q2'>They despised all my reproof. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_31">31&#160;</span>Therefore they will eat of the fruit of their own way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and be filled with their own schemes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_32">32&#160;</span>For the backsliding of the simple will kill them. </div>
<div class='q2'>The careless ease of fools will destroy them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR1_33">33&#160;</span>But whoever listens to me will dwell securely, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be at ease, without fear of harm.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_1">1&#160;</span>My son, if you will receive my words, </div>
<div class='q2'>and store up my commandments within you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_2">2&#160;</span>so as to turn your ear to wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and apply your heart to understanding; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_3">3&#160;</span>yes, if you call out for discernment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lift up your voice for understanding; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_4">4&#160;</span>if you seek her as silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and search for her as for hidden treasures; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_5">5&#160;</span>then you will understand the fear of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and find the knowledge of God.<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_6">6&#160;</span>For Yahweh gives wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_7">7&#160;</span>He lays up sound wisdom for the upright. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is a shield to those who walk in integrity, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_8">8&#160;</span>that he may guard the paths of justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and preserve the way of his saints. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_9">9&#160;</span>Then you will understand righteousness and justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>equity and every good path. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_10">10&#160;</span>For wisdom will enter into your heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Knowledge will be pleasant to your soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_11">11&#160;</span>Discretion will watch over you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Understanding will keep you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_12">12&#160;</span>to deliver you from the way of evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the men who speak perverse things, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_13">13&#160;</span>who forsake the paths of uprightness, </div>
<div class='q2'>to walk in the ways of darkness, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_14">14&#160;</span>who rejoice to do evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delight in the perverseness of evil, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_15">15&#160;</span>who are crooked in their ways, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wayward in their paths, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_16">16&#160;</span>to deliver you from the strange woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>even from the foreigner who flatters with her words, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_17">17&#160;</span>who forsakes the friend of her youth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and forgets the covenant of her God; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_18">18&#160;</span>for her house leads down to death, </div>
<div class='q2'>her paths to the departed spirits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_19">19&#160;</span>None who go to her return again, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither do they attain to the paths of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore walk in the way of good men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and keep the paths of the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_21">21&#160;</span>For the upright will dwell in the land. </div>
<div class='q2'>The perfect will remain in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR2_22">22&#160;</span>But the wicked will be cut off from the land. </div>
<div class='q2'>The treacherous will be rooted out of it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_1">1&#160;</span>My son, don’t forget my teaching, </div>
<div class='q2'>but let your heart keep my commandments, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_2">2&#160;</span>for they will add to you length of days, </div>
<div class='q2'>years of life, and peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t let kindness and truth forsake you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Bind them around your neck. </div>
<div class='q2'>Write them on the tablet of your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_4">4&#160;</span>So you will find favor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and good understanding in the sight of God and man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_5">5&#160;</span>Trust in Yahweh with all your heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t lean on your own understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_6">6&#160;</span>In all your ways acknowledge him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will make your paths straight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_7">7&#160;</span>Don’t be wise in your own eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Fear Yahweh, and depart from evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_8">8&#160;</span>It will be health to your body, </div>
<div class='q2'>and nourishment to your bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_9">9&#160;</span>Honor Yahweh with your substance, </div>
<div class='q2'>with the first fruits of all your increase; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_10">10&#160;</span>so your barns will be filled with plenty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your vats will overflow with new wine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_11">11&#160;</span>My son, don’t despise Yahweh’s discipline, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither be weary of his correction; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_12">12&#160;</span>for whom Yahweh loves, he corrects, </div>
<div class='q2'>even as a father reproves the son in whom he delights. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_13">13&#160;</span>Happy is the man who finds wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>the man who gets understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_14">14&#160;</span>For her good profit is better than getting silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her return is better than fine gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_15">15&#160;</span>She is more precious than rubies. </div>
<div class='q2'>None of the things you can desire are to be compared to her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_16">16&#160;</span>Length of days is in her right hand. </div>
<div class='q2'>In her left hand are riches and honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_17">17&#160;</span>Her ways are ways of pleasantness. </div>
<div class='q2'>All her paths are peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_18">18&#160;</span>She is a tree of life to those who lay hold of her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Happy is everyone who retains her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_19">19&#160;</span>By wisdom Yahweh founded the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>By understanding, he established the heavens. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_20">20&#160;</span>By his knowledge, the depths were broken up, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the skies drop down the dew. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_21">21&#160;</span>My son, let them not depart from your eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep sound wisdom and discretion, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_22">22&#160;</span>so they will be life to your soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and grace for your neck. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_23">23&#160;</span>Then you shall walk in your way securely. </div>
<div class='q2'>Your foot won’t stumble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_24">24&#160;</span>When you lie down, you will not be afraid. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, you will lie down, and your sleep will be sweet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t be afraid of sudden fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_26">26&#160;</span>for Yahweh will be your confidence, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will keep your foot from being taken. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_27">27&#160;</span>Don’t withhold good from those to whom it is due, </div>
<div class='q2'>when it is in the power of your hand to do it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_28">28&#160;</span>Don’t say to your neighbor, “Go, and come again; </div>
<div class='q2'>tomorrow I will give it to you,” </div>
<div class='q2'>when you have it by you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t devise evil against your neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>since he dwells securely by you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_30">30&#160;</span>Don’t strive with a man without cause, </div>
<div class='q2'>if he has done you no harm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_31">31&#160;</span>Don’t envy the man of violence. </div>
<div class='q2'>Choose none of his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_32">32&#160;</span>For the perverse is an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his friendship is with the upright. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_33">33&#160;</span>Yahweh’s curse is in the house of the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he blesses the habitation of the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_34">34&#160;</span>Surely he mocks the mockers, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he gives grace to the humble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR3_35">35&#160;</span>The wise will inherit glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>but shame will be the promotion of fools.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_1">1&#160;</span>Listen, sons, to a father’s instruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pay attention and know understanding; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_2">2&#160;</span>for I give you sound learning. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t forsake my law. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_3">3&#160;</span>For I was a son to my father, </div>
<div class='q2'>tender and an only child in the sight of my mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_4">4&#160;</span>He taught me, and said to me: </div>
<div class='q2'>“Let your heart retain my words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep my commandments, and live. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_5">5&#160;</span>Get wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Get understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t forget, and don’t deviate from the words of my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t forsake her, and she will preserve you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Love her, and she will keep you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_7">7&#160;</span>Wisdom is supreme. </div>
<div class='q2'>Get wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, though it costs all your possessions, get understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_8">8&#160;</span>Esteem her, and she will exalt you. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will bring you to honor when you embrace her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_9">9&#160;</span>She will give to your head a garland of grace. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will deliver a crown of splendor to you.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_10">10&#160;</span>Listen, my son, and receive my sayings. </div>
<div class='q2'>The years of your life will be many. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_11">11&#160;</span>I have taught you in the way of wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have led you in straight paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_12">12&#160;</span>When you go, your steps will not be hampered. </div>
<div class='q2'>When you run, you will not stumble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_13">13&#160;</span>Take firm hold of instruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let her go. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep her, for she is your life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_14">14&#160;</span>Don’t enter into the path of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t walk in the way of evil men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_15">15&#160;</span>Avoid it, and don’t pass by it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Turn from it, and pass on. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_16">16&#160;</span>For they don’t sleep unless they do evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their sleep is taken away, unless they make someone fall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_17">17&#160;</span>For they eat the bread of wickedness </div>
<div class='q2'>and drink the wine of violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_18">18&#160;</span>But the path of the righteous is like the dawning light </div>
<div class='q2'>that shines more and more until the perfect day. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_19">19&#160;</span>The way of the wicked is like darkness. </div>
<div class='q2'>They don’t know what they stumble over. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_20">20&#160;</span>My son, attend to my words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Turn your ear to my sayings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_21">21&#160;</span>Let them not depart from your eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>Keep them in the center of your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_22">22&#160;</span>For they are life to those who find them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and health to their whole body. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_23">23&#160;</span>Keep your heart with all diligence, </div>
<div class='q2'>for out of it is the wellspring of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_24">24&#160;</span>Put away from yourself a perverse mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Put corrupt lips far from you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_25">25&#160;</span>Let your eyes look straight ahead. </div>
<div class='q2'>Fix your gaze directly before you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_26">26&#160;</span>Make the path of your feet level. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let all of your ways be established. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR4_27">27&#160;</span>Don’t turn to the right hand nor to the left. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remove your foot from evil.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_1">1&#160;</span>My son, pay attention to my wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Turn your ear to my understanding, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_2">2&#160;</span>that you may maintain discretion, </div>
<div class='q2'>that your lips may preserve knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_3">3&#160;</span>For the lips of an adulteress drip honey. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her mouth is smoother than oil, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_4">4&#160;</span>but in the end she is as bitter as wormwood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as sharp as a two-edged sword. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_5">5&#160;</span>Her feet go down to death. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her steps lead straight to Sheol.<a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_6">6&#160;</span>She gives no thought to the way of life. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her ways are crooked, and she doesn’t know it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_7">7&#160;</span>Now therefore, my sons, listen to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t depart from the words of my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_8">8&#160;</span>Remove your way far from her. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t come near the door of her house, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_9">9&#160;</span>lest you give your honor to others, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your years to the cruel one; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_10">10&#160;</span>lest strangers feast on your wealth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your labors enrich another man’s house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_11">11&#160;</span>You will groan at your latter end, </div>
<div class='q2'>when your flesh and your body are consumed, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_12">12&#160;</span>and say, “How I have hated instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and my heart despised reproof. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_13">13&#160;</span>I haven’t obeyed the voice of my teachers, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor turned my ear to those who instructed me! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_14">14&#160;</span>I have come to the brink of utter ruin, </div>
<div class='q2'>among the gathered assembly.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_15">15&#160;</span>Drink water out of your own cistern, </div>
<div class='q2'>running water out of your own well. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_16">16&#160;</span>Should your springs overflow in the streets, </div>
<div class='q2'>streams of water in the public squares? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_17">17&#160;</span>Let them be for yourself alone, </div>
<div class='q2'>not for strangers with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_18">18&#160;</span>Let your spring be blessed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Rejoice in the wife of your youth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_19">19&#160;</span>A loving doe and a graceful deer— </div>
<div class='q2'>let her breasts satisfy you at all times. </div>
<div class='q2'>Be captivated always with her love. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_20">20&#160;</span>For why should you, my son, be captivated with an adulteress? </div>
<div class='q2'>Why embrace the bosom of another? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_21">21&#160;</span>For the ways of man are before Yahweh’s eyes. </div>
<div class='q2'>He examines all his paths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_22">22&#160;</span>The evil deeds of the wicked ensnare him. </div>
<div class='q2'>The cords of his sin hold him firmly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR5_23">23&#160;</span>He will die for lack of instruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the greatness of his folly, he will go astray.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_1">1&#160;</span>My son, if you have become collateral for your neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>if you have struck your hands in pledge for a stranger, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_2">2&#160;</span>you are trapped by the words of your mouth; </div>
<div class='q2'>you are ensnared with the words of your mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_3">3&#160;</span>Do this now, my son, and deliver yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>since you have come into the hand of your neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>Go, humble yourself. </div>
<div class='q2'>Press your plea with your neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_4">4&#160;</span>Give no sleep to your eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor slumber to your eyelids. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_5">5&#160;</span>Free yourself, like a gazelle from the hand of the hunter, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a bird from the snare of the fowler. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_6">6&#160;</span>Go to the ant, you sluggard. </div>
<div class='q2'>Consider her ways, and be wise; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_7">7&#160;</span>which having no chief, overseer, or ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_8">8&#160;</span>provides her bread in the summer, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gathers her food in the harvest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_9">9&#160;</span>How long will you sleep, sluggard? </div>
<div class='q2'>When will you arise out of your sleep? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_10">10&#160;</span>A little sleep, a little slumber, </div>
<div class='q2'>a little folding of the hands to sleep— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_11">11&#160;</span>so your poverty will come as a robber, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your scarcity as an armed man. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_12">12&#160;</span>A worthless person, a man of iniquity, </div>
<div class='q2'>is he who walks with a perverse mouth, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_13">13&#160;</span>who winks with his eyes, who signals with his feet, </div>
<div class='q2'>who motions with his fingers, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_14">14&#160;</span>in whose heart is perverseness, </div>
<div class='q2'>who devises evil continually, </div>
<div class='q2'>who always sows discord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore his calamity will come suddenly. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will be broken suddenly, and that without remedy. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_16">16&#160;</span>There are six things which Yahweh hates; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, seven which are an abomination to him: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_17">17&#160;</span>arrogant eyes, a lying tongue, </div>
<div class='q2'>hands that shed innocent blood, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_18">18&#160;</span>a heart that devises wicked schemes, </div>
<div class='q2'>feet that are swift in running to mischief, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_19">19&#160;</span>a false witness who utters lies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who sows discord among brothers. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_20">20&#160;</span>My son, keep your father’s commandment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t forsake your mother’s teaching. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_21">21&#160;</span>Bind them continually on your heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Tie them around your neck. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_22">22&#160;</span>When you walk, it will lead you. </div>
<div class='q2'>When you sleep, it will watch over you. </div>
<div class='q2'>When you awake, it will talk with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_23">23&#160;</span>For the commandment is a lamp, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the law is light. </div>
<div class='q2'>Reproofs of instruction are the way of life, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_24">24&#160;</span>to keep you from the immoral woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the flattery of the wayward wife’s tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t lust after her beauty in your heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither let her captivate you with her eyelids. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_26">26&#160;</span>For a prostitute reduces you to a piece of bread. </div>
<div class='q2'>The adulteress hunts for your precious life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_27">27&#160;</span>Can a man scoop fire into his lap, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his clothes not be burned? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_28">28&#160;</span>Or can one walk on hot coals, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his feet not be scorched? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_29">29&#160;</span>So is he who goes in to his neighbor’s wife. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever touches her will not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_30">30&#160;</span>Men don’t despise a thief </div>
<div class='q2'>if he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_31">31&#160;</span>but if he is found, he shall restore seven times. </div>
<div class='q2'>He shall give all the wealth of his house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_32">32&#160;</span>He who commits adultery with a woman is void of understanding. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who does it destroys his own soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_33">33&#160;</span>He will get wounds and dishonor. </div>
<div class='q2'>His reproach will not be wiped away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_34">34&#160;</span>For jealousy arouses the fury of the husband. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t spare in the day of vengeance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR6_35">35&#160;</span>He won’t regard any ransom, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will he rest content, though you give many gifts.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_1">1&#160;</span>My son, keep my words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Lay up my commandments within you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_2">2&#160;</span>Keep my commandments and live! </div>
<div class='q2'>Guard my teaching as the apple of your eye. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_3">3&#160;</span>Bind them on your fingers. </div>
<div class='q2'>Write them on the tablet of your heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_4">4&#160;</span>Tell wisdom, “You are my sister.” </div>
<div class='q2'>Call understanding your relative, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_5">5&#160;</span>that they may keep you from the strange woman, </div>
<div class='q2'>from the foreigner who flatters with her words. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_6">6&#160;</span>For at the window of my house, </div>
<div class='q2'>I looked out through my lattice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_7">7&#160;</span>I saw among the simple ones. </div>
<div class='q2'>I discerned among the youths a young man void of understanding, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_8">8&#160;</span>passing through the street near her corner, </div>
<div class='q2'>he went the way to her house, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_9">9&#160;</span>in the twilight, in the evening of the day, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the middle of the night and in the darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_10">10&#160;</span>Behold, there a woman met him with the attire of a prostitute, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with crafty intent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_11">11&#160;</span>She is loud and defiant. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her feet don’t stay in her house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_12">12&#160;</span>Now she is in the streets, now in the squares, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lurking at every corner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_13">13&#160;</span>So she caught him, and kissed him. </div>
<div class='q2'>With an impudent face she said to him: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_14">14&#160;</span>“Sacrifices of peace offerings are with me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Today I have paid my vows. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_15">15&#160;</span>Therefore I came out to meet you, </div>
<div class='q2'>to diligently seek your face, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I have found you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_16">16&#160;</span>I have spread my couch with carpets of tapestry, </div>
<div class='q2'>with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_17">17&#160;</span>I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_18">18&#160;</span>Come, let’s take our fill of loving until the morning. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s solace ourselves with loving. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_19">19&#160;</span>For my husband isn’t at home. </div>
<div class='q2'>He has gone on a long journey. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_20">20&#160;</span>He has taken a bag of money with him. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will come home at the full moon.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_21">21&#160;</span>With persuasive words, she led him astray. </div>
<div class='q2'>With the flattering of her lips, she seduced him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_22">22&#160;</span>He followed her immediately, </div>
<div class='q2'>as an ox goes to the slaughter, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a fool stepping into a noose. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_23">23&#160;</span>Until an arrow strikes through his liver, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a bird hurries to the snare, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t know that it will cost his life. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_24">24&#160;</span>Now therefore, sons, listen to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pay attention to the words of my mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_25">25&#160;</span>Don’t let your heart turn to her ways. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t go astray in her paths, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_26">26&#160;</span>for she has thrown down many wounded. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, all her slain are a mighty army. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR7_27">27&#160;</span>Her house is the way to Sheol,<a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>going down to the rooms of death.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_1">1&#160;</span>Doesn’t wisdom cry out? </div>
<div class='q2'>Doesn’t understanding raise her voice? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_2">2&#160;</span>On the top of high places by the way, </div>
<div class='q2'>where the paths meet, she stands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_3">3&#160;</span>Beside the gates, at the entry of the city, </div>
<div class='q2'>at the entry doors, she cries aloud: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_4">4&#160;</span>“I call to you men! </div>
<div class='q2'>I send my voice to the sons of mankind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_5">5&#160;</span>You simple, understand prudence! </div>
<div class='q2'>You fools, be of an understanding heart! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_6">6&#160;</span>Hear, for I will speak excellent things. </div>
<div class='q2'>The opening of my lips is for right things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_7">7&#160;</span>For my mouth speaks truth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Wickedness is an abomination to my lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_8">8&#160;</span>All the words of my mouth are in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is nothing crooked or perverse in them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_9">9&#160;</span>They are all plain to him who understands, </div>
<div class='q2'>right to those who find knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_10">10&#160;</span>Receive my instruction rather than silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>knowledge rather than choice gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_11">11&#160;</span>For wisdom is better than rubies. </div>
<div class='q2'>All the things that may be desired can’t be compared to it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_12">12&#160;</span>“I, wisdom, have made prudence my dwelling. </div>
<div class='q2'>Find out knowledge and discretion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_13">13&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh is to hate evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>I hate pride, arrogance, the evil way, and the perverse mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_14">14&#160;</span>Counsel and sound knowledge are mine. </div>
<div class='q2'>I have understanding and power. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_15">15&#160;</span>By me kings reign, </div>
<div class='q2'>and princes decree justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_16">16&#160;</span>By me princes rule, </div>
<div class='q2'>nobles, and all the righteous rulers of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_17">17&#160;</span>I love those who love me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who seek me diligently will find me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_18">18&#160;</span>With me are riches, honor, </div>
<div class='q2'>enduring wealth, and prosperity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_19">19&#160;</span>My fruit is better than gold, yes, than fine gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>my yield than choice silver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_20">20&#160;</span>I walk in the way of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the middle of the paths of justice, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_21">21&#160;</span>that I may give wealth to those who love me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I fill their treasuries. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_22">22&#160;</span>“Yahweh possessed me in the beginning of his work, </div>
<div class='q2'>before his deeds of old. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_23">23&#160;</span>I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>before the earth existed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_24">24&#160;</span>When there were no depths, I was born, </div>
<div class='q2'>when there were no springs abounding with water. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_25">25&#160;</span>Before the mountains were settled in place, </div>
<div class='q2'>before the hills, I was born; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_26">26&#160;</span>while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor the beginning of the dust of the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_27">27&#160;</span>When he established the heavens, I was there. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he set a circle on the surface of the deep, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_28">28&#160;</span>when he established the clouds above, </div>
<div class='q2'>when the springs of the deep became strong, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_29">29&#160;</span>when he gave to the sea its boundary, </div>
<div class='q2'>that the waters should not violate his commandment, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he marked out the foundations of the earth, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_30">30&#160;</span>then I was the craftsman by his side. </div>
<div class='q2'>I was a delight day by day, </div>
<div class='q2'>always rejoicing before him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_31">31&#160;</span>rejoicing in his whole world. </div>
<div class='q2'>My delight was with the sons of men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_32">32&#160;</span>“Now therefore, my sons, listen to me, </div>
<div class='q2'>for blessed are those who keep my ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_33">33&#160;</span>Hear instruction, and be wise. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t refuse it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_34">34&#160;</span>Blessed is the man who hears me, </div>
<div class='q2'>watching daily at my gates, </div>
<div class='q2'>waiting at my door posts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_35">35&#160;</span>For whoever finds me finds life, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will obtain favor from Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR8_36">36&#160;</span>But he who sins against me wrongs his own soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>All those who hate me love death.”  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_1">1&#160;</span>Wisdom has built her house. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has carved out her seven pillars. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_2">2&#160;</span>She has prepared her meat. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has mixed her wine. </div>
<div class='q2'>She has also set her table. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_3">3&#160;</span>She has sent out her maidens. </div>
<div class='q2'>She cries from the highest places of the city: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_4">4&#160;</span>“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here!” </div>
<div class='q2'>As for him who is void of understanding, she says to him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_5">5&#160;</span>“Come, eat some of my bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>Drink some of the wine which I have mixed! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_6">6&#160;</span>Leave your simple ways, and live. </div>
<div class='q2'>Walk in the way of understanding.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_7">7&#160;</span>One who corrects a mocker invites insult. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who reproves a wicked man invites abuse. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t reprove a scoffer, lest he hate you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Reprove a wise person, and he will love you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_9">9&#160;</span>Instruct a wise person, and he will be still wiser. </div>
<div class='q2'>Teach a righteous person, and he will increase in learning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_10">10&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh is the beginning of wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>The knowledge of the Holy One is understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_11">11&#160;</span>For by me your days will be multiplied. </div>
<div class='q2'>The years of your life will be increased. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_12">12&#160;</span>If you are wise, you are wise for yourself. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you mock, you alone will bear it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_13">13&#160;</span>The foolish woman is loud, </div>
<div class='q2'>undisciplined, and knows nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_14">14&#160;</span>She sits at the door of her house, </div>
<div class='q2'>on a seat in the high places of the city, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_15">15&#160;</span>to call to those who pass by, </div>
<div class='q2'>who go straight on their ways, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_16">16&#160;</span>“Whoever is simple, let him turn in here.” </div>
<div class='q2'>As for him who is void of understanding, she says to him, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_17">17&#160;</span>“Stolen water is sweet. </div>
<div class='q2'>Food eaten in secret is pleasant.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR9_18">18&#160;</span>But he doesn’t know that the departed spirits are there, </div>
<div class='q2'>that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR10_0'>10</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_1">1&#160;</span>The proverbs of Solomon. </div>
<div class='q'>A wise son makes a glad father; </div>
<div class='q2'>but a foolish son brings grief to his mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_2">2&#160;</span>Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>but righteousness delivers from death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh will not allow the soul of the righteous to go hungry, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he thrusts away the desire of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_4">4&#160;</span>He becomes poor who works with a lazy hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the hand of the diligent brings wealth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_5">5&#160;</span>He who gathers in summer is a wise son, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who sleeps during the harvest is a son who causes shame. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_6">6&#160;</span>Blessings are on the head of the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>but violence covers the mouth of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_7">7&#160;</span>The memory of the righteous is blessed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the name of the wicked will rot. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_8">8&#160;</span>The wise in heart accept commandments, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a chattering fool will fall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_9">9&#160;</span>He who walks blamelessly walks surely, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who perverts his ways will be found out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_10">10&#160;</span>One who winks with the eye causes sorrow, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a chattering fool will fall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_11">11&#160;</span>The mouth of the righteous is a spring of life, </div>
<div class='q2'>but violence covers the mouth of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_12">12&#160;</span>Hatred stirs up strife, </div>
<div class='q2'>but love covers all wrongs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_13">13&#160;</span>Wisdom is found on the lips of him who has discernment, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a rod is for the back of him who is void of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_14">14&#160;</span>Wise men lay up knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouth of the foolish is near ruin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_15">15&#160;</span>The rich man’s wealth is his strong city. </div>
<div class='q2'>The destruction of the poor is their poverty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_16">16&#160;</span>The labor of the righteous leads to life. </div>
<div class='q2'>The increase of the wicked leads to sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_17">17&#160;</span>He is in the way of life who heeds correction, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who forsakes reproof leads others astray. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_18">18&#160;</span>He who hides hatred has lying lips. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who utters a slander is a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_19">19&#160;</span>In the multitude of words there is no lack of disobedience, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who restrains his lips does wisely. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_20">20&#160;</span>The tongue of the righteous is like choice silver. </div>
<div class='q2'>The heart of the wicked is of little worth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_21">21&#160;</span>The lips of the righteous feed many, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the foolish die for lack of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_22">22&#160;</span>Yahweh’s blessing brings wealth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he adds no trouble to it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_23">23&#160;</span>It is a fool’s pleasure to do wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>but wisdom is a man of understanding’s pleasure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_24">24&#160;</span>What the wicked fear will overtake them, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the desire of the righteous will be granted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_25">25&#160;</span>When the whirlwind passes, the wicked is no more; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous stand firm forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_26">26&#160;</span>As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is the sluggard to those who send him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_27">27&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh prolongs days, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_28">28&#160;</span>The prospect of the righteous is joy, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the hope of the wicked will perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_29">29&#160;</span>The way of Yahweh is a stronghold to the upright, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_30">30&#160;</span>The righteous will never be removed, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wicked will not dwell in the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_31">31&#160;</span>The mouth of the righteous produces wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the perverse tongue will be cut off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR10_32">32&#160;</span>The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouth of the wicked is perverse.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_1">1&#160;</span>A false balance is an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but accurate weights are his delight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_2">2&#160;</span>When pride comes, then comes shame, </div>
<div class='q2'>but with humility comes wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_3">3&#160;</span>The integrity of the upright shall guide them, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_4">4&#160;</span>Riches don’t profit in the day of wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>but righteousness delivers from death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_5">5&#160;</span>The righteousness of the blameless will direct his way, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_6">6&#160;</span>The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the unfaithful will be trapped by evil desires. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_7">7&#160;</span>When a wicked man dies, hope perishes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and expectation of power comes to nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_8">8&#160;</span>A righteous person is delivered out of trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wicked takes his place. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_9">9&#160;</span>With his mouth the godless man destroys his neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous will be delivered through knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_10">10&#160;</span>When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices. </div>
<div class='q2'>When the wicked perish, there is shouting. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_11">11&#160;</span>By the blessing of the upright, the city is exalted, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_12">12&#160;</span>One who despises his neighbor is void of wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man of understanding holds his peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_13">13&#160;</span>One who brings gossip betrays a confidence, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who is of a trustworthy spirit is one who keeps a secret. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_14">14&#160;</span>Where there is no wise guidance, the nation falls, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in the multitude of counselors there is victory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_15">15&#160;</span>He who is collateral for a stranger will suffer for it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who refuses pledges of collateral is secure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_16">16&#160;</span>A gracious woman obtains honor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but violent men obtain riches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_17">17&#160;</span>The merciful man does good to his own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is cruel troubles his own flesh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_18">18&#160;</span>Wicked people earn deceitful wages, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who sows righteousness reaps a sure reward. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_19">19&#160;</span>He who is truly righteous gets life. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who pursues evil gets death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_20">20&#160;</span>Those who are perverse in heart are an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but those whose ways are blameless are his delight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_21">21&#160;</span>Most certainly, the evil man will not be unpunished, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the offspring<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> of the righteous will be delivered. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_22">22&#160;</span>Like a gold ring in a pig’s snout, </div>
<div class='q2'>is a beautiful woman who lacks discretion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_23">23&#160;</span>The desire of the righteous is only good. </div>
<div class='q2'>The expectation of the wicked is wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_24">24&#160;</span>There is one who scatters, and increases yet more. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is one who withholds more than is appropriate, but gains poverty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_25">25&#160;</span>The liberal soul shall be made fat. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who waters shall be watered also himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_26">26&#160;</span>People curse someone who withholds grain, </div>
<div class='q2'>but blessing will be on the head of him who sells it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_27">27&#160;</span>He who diligently seeks good seeks favor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who searches after evil, it shall come to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_28">28&#160;</span>He who trusts in his riches will fall, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_29">29&#160;</span>He who troubles his own house shall inherit the wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>The foolish shall be servant to the wise of heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_30">30&#160;</span>The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is wise wins souls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR11_31">31&#160;</span>Behold, the righteous shall be repaid in the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>how much more the wicked and the sinner!  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_1">1&#160;</span>Whoever loves correction loves knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who hates reproof is stupid. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_2">2&#160;</span>A good man shall obtain favor from Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he will condemn a man of wicked plans. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_3">3&#160;</span>A man shall not be established by wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the root of the righteous shall not be moved. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_4">4&#160;</span>A worthy woman is the crown of her husband, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a disgraceful wife is as rottenness in his bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_5">5&#160;</span>The thoughts of the righteous are just, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the advice of the wicked is deceitful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_6">6&#160;</span>The words of the wicked are about lying in wait for blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the speech of the upright rescues them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_7">7&#160;</span>The wicked are overthrown, and are no more, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the house of the righteous shall stand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_8">8&#160;</span>A man shall be commended according to his wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who has a warped mind shall be despised. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_9">9&#160;</span>Better is he who is little known, and has a servant, </div>
<div class='q2'>than he who honors himself and lacks bread. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_10">10&#160;</span>A righteous man respects the life of his animal, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_11">11&#160;</span>He who tills his land shall have plenty of bread, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who chases fantasies is void of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_12">12&#160;</span>The wicked desires the plunder of evil men, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the root of the righteous flourishes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_13">13&#160;</span>An evil man is trapped by sinfulness of lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous shall come out of trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_14">14&#160;</span>A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>The work of a man’s hands shall be rewarded to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_15">15&#160;</span>The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is wise listens to counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_16">16&#160;</span>A fool shows his annoyance the same day, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who overlooks an insult is prudent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_17">17&#160;</span>He who is truthful testifies honestly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a false witness lies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_18">18&#160;</span>There is one who speaks rashly like the piercing of a sword, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the tongue of the wise heals. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_19">19&#160;</span>Truth’s lips will be established forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a lying tongue is only momentary. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_20">20&#160;</span>Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>but joy comes to the promoters of peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_21">21&#160;</span>No mischief shall happen to the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wicked shall be filled with evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_22">22&#160;</span>Lying lips are an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but those who do the truth are his delight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_23">23&#160;</span>A prudent man keeps his knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the hearts of fools proclaim foolishness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_24">24&#160;</span>The hands of the diligent ones shall rule, </div>
<div class='q2'>but laziness ends in slave labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_25">25&#160;</span>Anxiety in a man’s heart weighs it down, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a kind word makes it glad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_26">26&#160;</span>A righteous person is cautious in friendship, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the way of the wicked leads them astray. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_27">27&#160;</span>The slothful man doesn’t roast his game, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the possessions of diligent men are prized. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR12_28">28&#160;</span>In the way of righteousness is life; </div>
<div class='q2'>in its path there is no death.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_1">1&#160;</span>A wise son listens to his father’s instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a scoffer doesn’t listen to rebuke. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_2">2&#160;</span>By the fruit of his lips, a man enjoys good things, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the unfaithful crave violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_3">3&#160;</span>He who guards his mouth guards his soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who opens wide his lips comes to ruin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_4">4&#160;</span>The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the desire of the diligent shall be fully satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_5">5&#160;</span>A righteous man hates lies, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a wicked man brings shame and disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_6">6&#160;</span>Righteousness guards the way of integrity, </div>
<div class='q2'>but wickedness overthrows the sinner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_7">7&#160;</span>There are some who pretend to be rich, yet have nothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>There are some who pretend to be poor, yet have great wealth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_8">8&#160;</span>The ransom of a man’s life is his riches, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the poor hear no threats. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_9">9&#160;</span>The light of the righteous shines brightly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the lamp of the wicked is snuffed out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_10">10&#160;</span>Pride only breeds quarrels, </div>
<div class='q2'>but wisdom is with people who take advice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_11">11&#160;</span>Wealth gained dishonestly dwindles away, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who gathers by hand makes it grow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_12">12&#160;</span>Hope deferred makes the heart sick, </div>
<div class='q2'>but when longing is fulfilled, it is a tree of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_13">13&#160;</span>Whoever despises instruction will pay for it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who respects a command will be rewarded. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_14">14&#160;</span>The teaching of the wise is a spring of life, </div>
<div class='q2'>to turn from the snares of death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_15">15&#160;</span>Good understanding wins favor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the way of the unfaithful is hard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_16">16&#160;</span>Every prudent man acts from knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a fool exposes folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_17">17&#160;</span>A wicked messenger falls into trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a trustworthy envoy gains healing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_18">18&#160;</span>Poverty and shame come to him who refuses discipline, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who heeds correction shall be honored. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_19">19&#160;</span>Longing fulfilled is sweet to the soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>but fools detest turning from evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_20">20&#160;</span>One who walks with wise men grows wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a companion of fools suffers harm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_21">21&#160;</span>Misfortune pursues sinners, </div>
<div class='q2'>but prosperity rewards the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_22">22&#160;</span>A good man leaves an inheritance to his children’s children, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wealth of the sinner is stored for the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_23">23&#160;</span>An abundance of food is in poor people’s fields, </div>
<div class='q2'>but injustice sweeps it away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_24">24&#160;</span>One who spares the rod hates his son, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who loves him is careful to discipline him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR13_25">25&#160;</span>The righteous one eats to the satisfying of his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the belly of the wicked goes hungry.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_1">1&#160;</span>Every wise woman builds her house, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the foolish one tears it down with her own hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_2">2&#160;</span>He who walks in his uprightness fears Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is perverse in his ways despises him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_3">3&#160;</span>The fool’s talk brings a rod to his back, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the lips of the wise protect them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_4">4&#160;</span>Where no oxen are, the crib is clean, </div>
<div class='q2'>but much increase is by the strength of the ox. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_5">5&#160;</span>A truthful witness will not lie, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a false witness pours out lies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_6">6&#160;</span>A scoffer seeks wisdom, and doesn’t find it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but knowledge comes easily to a discerning person. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_7">7&#160;</span>Stay away from a foolish man, </div>
<div class='q2'>for you won’t find knowledge on his lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_8">8&#160;</span>The wisdom of the prudent is to think about his way, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the folly of fools is deceit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_9">9&#160;</span>Fools mock at making atonement for sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>but among the upright there is good will. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_10">10&#160;</span>The heart knows its own bitterness and joy; </div>
<div class='q2'>he will not share these with a stranger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_11">11&#160;</span>The house of the wicked will be overthrown, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the tent of the upright will flourish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_12">12&#160;</span>There is a way which seems right to a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in the end it leads to death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_13">13&#160;</span>Even in laughter the heart may be sorrowful, </div>
<div class='q2'>and mirth may end in heaviness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_14">14&#160;</span>The unfaithful will be repaid for his own ways; </div>
<div class='q2'>likewise a good man will be rewarded for his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_15">15&#160;</span>A simple man believes everything, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the prudent man carefully considers his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_16">16&#160;</span>A wise man fears and shuns evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the fool is hot headed and reckless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_17">17&#160;</span>He who is quick to become angry will commit folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a crafty man is hated. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_18">18&#160;</span>The simple inherit folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the prudent are crowned with knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_19">19&#160;</span>The evil bow down before the good, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wicked at the gates of the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_20">20&#160;</span>The poor person is shunned even by his own neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the rich person has many friends. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_21">21&#160;</span>He who despises his neighbor sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who has pity on the poor is blessed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t they go astray who plot evil? </div>
<div class='q2'>But love and faithfulness belong to those who plan good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_23">23&#160;</span>In all hard work there is profit, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the talk of the lips leads only to poverty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_24">24&#160;</span>The crown of the wise is their riches, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the folly of fools crowns them with folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_25">25&#160;</span>A truthful witness saves souls, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a false witness is deceitful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_26">26&#160;</span>In the fear of Yahweh is a secure fortress, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will be a refuge for his children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_27">27&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh is a fountain of life, </div>
<div class='q2'>turning people from the snares of death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_28">28&#160;</span>In the multitude of people is the king’s glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in the lack of people is the destruction of the prince. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_29">29&#160;</span>He who is slow to anger has great understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who has a quick temper displays folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_30">30&#160;</span>The life of the body is a heart at peace, </div>
<div class='q2'>but envy rots the bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_31">31&#160;</span>He who oppresses the poor shows contempt for his Maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is kind to the needy honors him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_32">32&#160;</span>The wicked is brought down in his calamity, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in death, the righteous has a refuge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_33">33&#160;</span>Wisdom rests in the heart of one who has understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is even made known in the inward part of fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_34">34&#160;</span>Righteousness exalts a nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>but sin is a disgrace to any people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR14_35">35&#160;</span>The king’s favor is toward a servant who deals wisely, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his wrath is toward one who causes shame.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_1">1&#160;</span>A gentle answer turns away wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a harsh word stirs up anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_2">2&#160;</span>The tongue of the wise commends knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouths of fools gush out folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_3">3&#160;</span>Yahweh’s eyes are everywhere, </div>
<div class='q2'>keeping watch on the evil and the good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_4">4&#160;</span>A gentle tongue is a tree of life, </div>
<div class='q2'>but deceit in it crushes the spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_5">5&#160;</span>A fool despises his father’s correction, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who heeds reproof shows prudence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_6">6&#160;</span>In the house of the righteous is much treasure, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the income of the wicked brings trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_7">7&#160;</span>The lips of the wise spread knowledge; </div>
<div class='q2'>not so with the heart of fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_8">8&#160;</span>The sacrifice made by the wicked is an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the prayer of the upright is his delight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_9">9&#160;</span>The way of the wicked is an abomination to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he loves him who follows after righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_10">10&#160;</span>There is stern discipline for one who forsakes the way. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever hates reproof shall die. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_11">11&#160;</span>Sheol<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and Abaddon are before Yahweh— </div>
<div class='q2'>how much more then the hearts of the children of men! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_12">12&#160;</span>A scoffer doesn’t love to be reproved; </div>
<div class='q2'>he will not go to the wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_13">13&#160;</span>A glad heart makes a cheerful face, </div>
<div class='q2'>but an aching heart breaks the spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_14">14&#160;</span>The heart of one who has understanding seeks knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouths of fools feed on folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_15">15&#160;</span>All the days of the afflicted are wretched, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who has a cheerful heart enjoys a continual feast. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_16">16&#160;</span>Better is little, with the fear of Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>than great treasure with trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_17">17&#160;</span>Better is a dinner of herbs, where love is, </div>
<div class='q2'>than a fattened calf with hatred. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_18">18&#160;</span>A wrathful man stirs up contention, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who is slow to anger appeases strife. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_19">19&#160;</span>The way of the sluggard is like a thorn patch, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the path of the upright is a highway. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_20">20&#160;</span>A wise son makes a father glad, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a foolish man despises his mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_21">21&#160;</span>Folly is joy to one who is void of wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man of understanding keeps his way straight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_22">22&#160;</span>Where there is no counsel, plans fail; </div>
<div class='q2'>but in a multitude of counselors they are established. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_23">23&#160;</span>Joy comes to a man with the reply of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>How good is a word at the right time! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_24">24&#160;</span>The path of life leads upward for the wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>to keep him from going downward to Sheol.<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_25">25&#160;</span>Yahweh will uproot the house of the proud, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he will keep the widow’s borders intact. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_26">26&#160;</span>Yahweh detests the thoughts of the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the thoughts of the pure are pleasing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_27">27&#160;</span>He who is greedy for gain troubles his own house, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who hates bribes will live. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_28">28&#160;</span>The heart of the righteous weighs answers, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the mouth of the wicked gushes out evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_29">29&#160;</span>Yahweh is far from the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he hears the prayer of the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_30">30&#160;</span>The light of the eyes rejoices the heart. </div>
<div class='q2'>Good news gives health to the bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_31">31&#160;</span>The ear that listens to reproof lives, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be at home among the wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_32">32&#160;</span>He who refuses correction despises his own soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who listens to reproof gets understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR15_33">33&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh teaches wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Before honor is humility.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_1">1&#160;</span>The plans of the heart belong to man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the answer of the tongue is from Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_2">2&#160;</span>All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Yahweh weighs the motives. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_3">3&#160;</span>Commit your deeds to Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your plans shall succeed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_4">4&#160;</span>Yahweh has made everything for its own end— </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, even the wicked for the day of evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_5">5&#160;</span>Everyone who is proud in heart is an abomination to Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>they shall certainly not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_6">6&#160;</span>By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for. </div>
<div class='q2'>By the fear of Yahweh men depart from evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_7">7&#160;</span>When a man’s ways please Yahweh, </div>
<div class='q2'>he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_8">8&#160;</span>Better is a little with righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>than great revenues with injustice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_9">9&#160;</span>A man’s heart plans his course, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Yahweh directs his steps. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_10">10&#160;</span>Inspired judgments are on the lips of the king. </div>
<div class='q2'>He shall not betray his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_11">11&#160;</span>Honest balances and scales are Yahweh’s; </div>
<div class='q2'>all the weights in the bag are his work. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_12">12&#160;</span>It is an abomination for kings to do wrong, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the throne is established by righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_13">13&#160;</span>Righteous lips are the delight of kings. </div>
<div class='q2'>They value one who speaks the truth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_14">14&#160;</span>The king’s wrath is a messenger of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a wise man will pacify it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_15">15&#160;</span>In the light of the king’s face is life. </div>
<div class='q2'>His favor is like a cloud of the spring rain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_16">16&#160;</span>How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, to get understanding is to be chosen rather than silver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_17">17&#160;</span>The highway of the upright is to depart from evil. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who keeps his way preserves his soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_18">18&#160;</span>Pride goes before destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an arrogant spirit before a fall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_19">19&#160;</span>It is better to be of a lowly spirit with the poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>than to divide the plunder with the proud. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_20">20&#160;</span>He who heeds the Word finds prosperity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever trusts in Yahweh is blessed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_21">21&#160;</span>The wise in heart shall be called prudent. </div>
<div class='q2'>Pleasantness of the lips promotes instruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_22">22&#160;</span>Understanding is a fountain of life to one who has it, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the punishment of fools is their folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_23">23&#160;</span>The heart of the wise instructs his mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and adds learning to his lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_24">24&#160;</span>Pleasant words are a honeycomb, </div>
<div class='q2'>sweet to the soul, and health to the bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_25">25&#160;</span>There is a way which seems right to a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but in the end it leads to death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_26">26&#160;</span>The appetite of the laboring man labors for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his mouth urges him on. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_27">27&#160;</span>A worthless man devises mischief. </div>
<div class='q2'>His speech is like a scorching fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_28">28&#160;</span>A perverse man stirs up strife. </div>
<div class='q2'>A whisperer separates close friends. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_29">29&#160;</span>A man of violence entices his neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and leads him in a way that is not good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_30">30&#160;</span>One who winks his eyes to plot perversities, </div>
<div class='q2'>one who compresses his lips, is bent on evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_31">31&#160;</span>Gray hair is a crown of glory. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is attained by a life of righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_32">32&#160;</span>One who is slow to anger is better than the mighty; </div>
<div class='q2'>one who rules his spirit, than he who takes a city. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR16_33">33&#160;</span>The lot is cast into the lap, </div>
<div class='q2'>but its every decision is from Yahweh.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_1">1&#160;</span>Better is a dry morsel with quietness, </div>
<div class='q2'>than a house full of feasting with strife. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_2">2&#160;</span>A servant who deals wisely will rule over a son who causes shame, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shall have a part in the inheritance among the brothers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_3">3&#160;</span>The refining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Yahweh tests the hearts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_4">4&#160;</span>An evildoer heeds wicked lips. </div>
<div class='q2'>A liar gives ear to a mischievous tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_5">5&#160;</span>Whoever mocks the poor reproaches his Maker. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_6">6&#160;</span>Children’s children are the crown of old men; </div>
<div class='q2'>the glory of children is their parents. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_7">7&#160;</span>Excellent speech isn’t fitting for a fool, </div>
<div class='q2'>much less do lying lips fit a prince. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_8">8&#160;</span>A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes of him who gives it; </div>
<div class='q2'>wherever he turns, he prospers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_9">9&#160;</span>He who covers an offense promotes love; </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who repeats a matter separates best friends. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_10">10&#160;</span>A rebuke enters deeper into one who has understanding </div>
<div class='q2'>than a hundred lashes into a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_11">11&#160;</span>An evil man seeks only rebellion; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_12">12&#160;</span>Let a bear robbed of her cubs meet a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>rather than a fool in his folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_13">13&#160;</span>Whoever rewards evil for good, </div>
<div class='q2'>evil shall not depart from his house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_14">14&#160;</span>The beginning of strife is like breaching a dam, </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore stop contention before quarreling breaks out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_15">15&#160;</span>He who justifies the wicked, and he who condemns the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_16">16&#160;</span>Why is there money in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>since he has no understanding? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_17">17&#160;</span>A friend loves at all times; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a brother is born for adversity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_18">18&#160;</span>A man void of understanding strikes hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and becomes collateral in the presence of his neighbor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_19">19&#160;</span>He who loves disobedience loves strife. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who builds a high gate seeks destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_20">20&#160;</span>One who has a perverse heart doesn’t find prosperity, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one who has a deceitful tongue falls into trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_21">21&#160;</span>He who becomes the father of a fool grieves. </div>
<div class='q2'>The father of a fool has no joy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_22">22&#160;</span>A cheerful heart makes good medicine, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a crushed spirit dries up the bones. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_23">23&#160;</span>A wicked man receives a bribe in secret, </div>
<div class='q2'>to pervert the ways of justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_24">24&#160;</span>Wisdom is before the face of one who has understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the eyes of a fool wander to the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_25">25&#160;</span>A foolish son brings grief to his father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bitterness to her who bore him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_26">26&#160;</span>Also to punish the righteous is not good, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor to flog officials for their integrity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_27">27&#160;</span>He who spares his words has knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is even tempered is a man of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR17_28">28&#160;</span>Even a fool, when he keeps silent, is counted wise. </div>
<div class='q2'>When he shuts his lips, he is thought to be discerning.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_1">1&#160;</span>A man who isolates himself pursues selfishness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and defies all sound judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_2">2&#160;</span>A fool has no delight in understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>but only in revealing his own opinion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_3">3&#160;</span>When wickedness comes, contempt also comes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with shame comes disgrace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_4">4&#160;</span>The words of a man’s mouth are like deep waters. </div>
<div class='q2'>The fountain of wisdom is like a flowing brook. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_5">5&#160;</span>To be partial to the faces of the wicked is not good, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor to deprive the innocent of justice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_6">6&#160;</span>A fool’s lips come into strife, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his mouth invites beatings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_7">7&#160;</span>A fool’s mouth is his destruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his lips are a snare to his soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_8">8&#160;</span>The words of a gossip are like dainty morsels: </div>
<div class='q2'>they go down into a person’s innermost parts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_9">9&#160;</span>One who is slack in his work </div>
<div class='q2'>is brother to him who is a master of destruction. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_10">10&#160;</span>Yahweh’s name is a strong tower: </div>
<div class='q2'>the righteous run to him, and are safe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_11">11&#160;</span>The rich man’s wealth is his strong city, </div>
<div class='q2'>like an unscalable wall in his own imagination. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_12">12&#160;</span>Before destruction the heart of man is proud, </div>
<div class='q2'>but before honor is humility. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_13">13&#160;</span>He who answers before he hears, </div>
<div class='q2'>that is folly and shame to him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_14">14&#160;</span>A man’s spirit will sustain him in sickness, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a crushed spirit, who can bear? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_15">15&#160;</span>The heart of the discerning gets knowledge. </div>
<div class='q2'>The ear of the wise seeks knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_16">16&#160;</span>A man’s gift makes room for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings him before great men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_17">17&#160;</span>He who pleads his cause first seems right— </div>
<div class='q2'>until another comes and questions him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_18">18&#160;</span>The lot settles disputes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and keeps strong ones apart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_19">19&#160;</span>A brother offended is more difficult than a fortified city. </div>
<div class='q2'>Disputes are like the bars of a fortress. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_20">20&#160;</span>A man’s stomach is filled with the fruit of his mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>With the harvest of his lips he is satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_21">21&#160;</span>Death and life are in the power of the tongue; </div>
<div class='q2'>those who love it will eat its fruit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_22">22&#160;</span>Whoever finds a wife finds a good thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and obtains favor of Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_23">23&#160;</span>The poor plead for mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the rich answer harshly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR18_24">24&#160;</span>A man of many companions may be ruined, </div>
<div class='q2'>but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_1">1&#160;</span>Better is the poor who walks in his integrity </div>
<div class='q2'>than he who is perverse in his lips and is a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_2">2&#160;</span>It isn’t good to have zeal without knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor being hasty with one’s feet and missing the way. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_3">3&#160;</span>The foolishness of man subverts his way; </div>
<div class='q2'>his heart rages against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_4">4&#160;</span>Wealth adds many friends, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the poor is separated from his friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_5">5&#160;</span>A false witness shall not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who pours out lies shall not go free. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_6">6&#160;</span>Many will entreat the favor of a ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>and everyone is a friend to a man who gives gifts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_7">7&#160;</span>All the relatives of the poor shun him; </div>
<div class='q2'>how much more do his friends avoid him! </div>
<div class='q2'>He pursues them with pleas, but they are gone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_8">8&#160;</span>He who gets wisdom loves his own soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who keeps understanding shall find good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_9">9&#160;</span>A false witness shall not be unpunished. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who utters lies shall perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_10">10&#160;</span>Delicate living is not appropriate for a fool, </div>
<div class='q2'>much less for a servant to have rule over princes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_11">11&#160;</span>The discretion of a man makes him slow to anger. </div>
<div class='q2'>It is his glory to overlook an offense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_12">12&#160;</span>The king’s wrath is like the roaring of a lion, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his favor is like dew on the grass. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_13">13&#160;</span>A foolish son is the calamity of his father. </div>
<div class='q2'>A wife’s quarrels are a continual dripping. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_14">14&#160;</span>House and riches are an inheritance from fathers, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a prudent wife is from Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_15">15&#160;</span>Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep. </div>
<div class='q2'>The idle soul shall suffer hunger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_16">16&#160;</span>He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is contemptuous in his ways shall die. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_17">17&#160;</span>He who has pity on the poor lends to Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>he will reward him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_18">18&#160;</span>Discipline your son, for there is hope; </div>
<div class='q2'>don’t be a willing party to his death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_19">19&#160;</span>A hot-tempered man must pay the penalty, </div>
<div class='q2'>for if you rescue him, you must do it again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_20">20&#160;</span>Listen to counsel and receive instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may be wise in your latter end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_21">21&#160;</span>There are many plans in a man’s heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Yahweh’s counsel will prevail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_22">22&#160;</span>That which makes a man to be desired is his kindness. </div>
<div class='q2'>A poor man is better than a liar. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_23">23&#160;</span>The fear of Yahweh leads to life, then contentment; </div>
<div class='q2'>he rests and will not be touched by trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_24">24&#160;</span>The sluggard buries his hand in the dish; </div>
<div class='q2'>he will not so much as bring it to his mouth again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_25">25&#160;</span>Flog a scoffer, and the simple will learn prudence; </div>
<div class='q2'>rebuke one who has understanding, and he will gain knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_26">26&#160;</span>He who robs his father and drives away his mother </div>
<div class='q2'>is a son who causes shame and brings reproach. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_27">27&#160;</span>If you stop listening to instruction, my son, </div>
<div class='q2'>you will stray from the words of knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_28">28&#160;</span>A corrupt witness mocks justice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the mouth of the wicked gulps down iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR19_29">29&#160;</span>Penalties are prepared for scoffers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beatings for the backs of fools. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR20_0'> 20</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_1">1&#160;</span>Wine is a mocker and beer is a brawler. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever is led astray by them is not wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_2">2&#160;</span>The terror of a king is like the roaring of a lion. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who provokes him to anger forfeits his own life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_3">3&#160;</span>It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife, </div>
<div class='q2'>but every fool will be quarreling. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_4">4&#160;</span>The sluggard will not plow by reason of the winter; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_5">5&#160;</span>Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man of understanding will draw it out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_6">6&#160;</span>Many men claim to be men of unfailing love, </div>
<div class='q2'>but who can find a faithful man? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_7">7&#160;</span>A righteous man walks in integrity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Blessed are his children after him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_8">8&#160;</span>A king who sits on the throne of judgment </div>
<div class='q2'>scatters away all evil with his eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_9">9&#160;</span>Who can say, “I have made my heart pure. </div>
<div class='q2'>I am clean and without sin?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_10">10&#160;</span>Differing weights and differing measures, </div>
<div class='q2'>both of them alike are an abomination to Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_11">11&#160;</span>Even a child makes himself known by his doings, </div>
<div class='q2'>whether his work is pure, and whether it is right. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_12">12&#160;</span>The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh has made even both of them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t love sleep, lest you come to poverty. </div>
<div class='q2'>Open your eyes, and you shall be satisfied with bread. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_14">14&#160;</span>“It’s no good, it’s no good,” says the buyer; </div>
<div class='q2'>but when he is gone his way, then he boasts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_15">15&#160;</span>There is gold and abundance of rubies, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the lips of knowledge are a rare jewel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_16">16&#160;</span>Take the garment of one who puts up collateral for a stranger; </div>
<div class='q2'>and hold him in pledge for a wayward woman. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_17">17&#160;</span>Fraudulent food is sweet to a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but afterwards his mouth is filled with gravel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_18">18&#160;</span>Plans are established by advice; </div>
<div class='q2'>by wise guidance you wage war! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_19">19&#160;</span>He who goes about as a tale-bearer reveals secrets; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore don’t keep company with him who opens wide his lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_20">20&#160;</span>Whoever curses his father or his mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_21">21&#160;</span>An inheritance quickly gained at the beginning </div>
<div class='q2'>won’t be blessed in the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t say, “I will pay back evil.” </div>
<div class='q2'>Wait for Yahweh, and he will save you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_23">23&#160;</span>Yahweh detests differing weights, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dishonest scales are not pleasing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_24">24&#160;</span>A man’s steps are from Yahweh; </div>
<div class='q2'>how then can man understand his way? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_25">25&#160;</span>It is a snare to a man to make a rash dedication, </div>
<div class='q2'>then later to consider his vows. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_26">26&#160;</span>A wise king winnows out the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and drives the threshing wheel over them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_27">27&#160;</span>The spirit of man is Yahweh’s lamp, </div>
<div class='q2'>searching all his innermost parts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_28">28&#160;</span>Love and faithfulness keep the king safe. </div>
<div class='q2'>His throne is sustained by love. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_29">29&#160;</span>The glory of young men is their strength. </div>
<div class='q2'>The splendor of old men is their gray hair. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR20_30">30&#160;</span>Wounding blows cleanse away evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and beatings purge the innermost parts. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR21_0'> 21</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_1">1&#160;</span>The king’s heart is in Yahweh’s hand like the watercourses. </div>
<div class='q2'>He turns it wherever he desires. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_2">2&#160;</span>Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>but Yahweh weighs the hearts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_3">3&#160;</span>To do righteousness and justice </div>
<div class='q2'>is more acceptable to Yahweh than sacrifice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_4">4&#160;</span>A high look and a proud heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>the lamp of the wicked, is sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_5">5&#160;</span>The plans of the diligent surely lead to profit; </div>
<div class='q2'>and everyone who is hasty surely rushes to poverty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_6">6&#160;</span>Getting treasures by a lying tongue </div>
<div class='q2'>is a fleeting vapor for those who seek death. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_7">7&#160;</span>The violence of the wicked will drive them away, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they refuse to do what is right. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_8">8&#160;</span>The way of the guilty is devious, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the conduct of the innocent is upright. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_9">9&#160;</span>It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop </div>
<div class='q2'>than to share a house with a contentious woman. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_10">10&#160;</span>The soul of the wicked desires evil; </div>
<div class='q2'>his neighbor finds no mercy in his eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_11">11&#160;</span>When the mocker is punished, the simple gains wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>When the wise is instructed, he receives knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_12">12&#160;</span>The Righteous One considers the house of the wicked, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings the wicked to ruin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_13">13&#160;</span>Whoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will also cry out, but shall not be heard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_14">14&#160;</span>A gift in secret pacifies anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a bribe in the cloak, strong wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_15">15&#160;</span>It is joy to the righteous to do justice; </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_16">16&#160;</span>The man who wanders out of the way of understanding </div>
<div class='q2'>shall rest in the assembly of the departed spirits. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_17">17&#160;</span>He who loves pleasure will be a poor man. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who loves wine and oil won’t be rich. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_18">18&#160;</span>The wicked is a ransom for the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>the treacherous for the upright. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_19">19&#160;</span>It is better to dwell in a desert land, </div>
<div class='q2'>than with a contentious and fretful woman. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_20">20&#160;</span>There is precious treasure and oil in the dwelling of the wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a foolish man swallows it up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_21">21&#160;</span>He who follows after righteousness and kindness </div>
<div class='q2'>finds life, righteousness, and honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_22">22&#160;</span>A wise man scales the city of the mighty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and brings down the strength of its confidence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_23">23&#160;</span>Whoever guards his mouth and his tongue </div>
<div class='q2'>keeps his soul from troubles. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_24">24&#160;</span>The proud and arrogant man—“Scoffer” is his name— </div>
<div class='q2'>he works in the arrogance of pride. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_25">25&#160;</span>The desire of the sluggard kills him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for his hands refuse to labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_26">26&#160;</span>There are those who covet greedily all day long; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous give and don’t withhold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_27">27&#160;</span>The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination— </div>
<div class='q2'>how much more, when he brings it with a wicked mind! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_28">28&#160;</span>A false witness will perish. </div>
<div class='q2'>A man who listens speaks to eternity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_29">29&#160;</span>A wicked man hardens his face; </div>
<div class='q2'>but as for the upright, he establishes his ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_30">30&#160;</span>There is no wisdom nor understanding </div>
<div class='q2'>nor counsel against Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR21_31">31&#160;</span>The horse is prepared for the day of battle; </div>
<div class='q2'>but victory is with Yahweh. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR22_0'> 22</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_1">1&#160;</span>A good name is more desirable than great riches, </div>
<div class='q2'>and loving favor is better than silver and gold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_2">2&#160;</span>The rich and the poor have this in common: </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh is the maker of them all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_3">3&#160;</span>A prudent man sees danger and hides himself; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the simple pass on, and suffer for it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_4">4&#160;</span>The result of humility and the fear of Yahweh </div>
<div class='q2'>is wealth, honor, and life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_5">5&#160;</span>Thorns and snares are in the path of the wicked; </div>
<div class='q2'>whoever guards his soul stays from them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_6">6&#160;</span>Train up a child in the way he should go, </div>
<div class='q2'>and when he is old he will not depart from it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_7">7&#160;</span>The rich rule over the poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>The borrower is servant to the lender. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_8">8&#160;</span>He who sows wickedness reaps trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the rod of his fury will be destroyed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_9">9&#160;</span>He who has a generous eye will be blessed, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he shares his food with the poor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_10">10&#160;</span>Drive out the mocker, and strife will go out; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, quarrels and insults will stop. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_11">11&#160;</span>He who loves purity of heart and speaks gracefully </div>
<div class='q2'>is the king’s friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_12">12&#160;</span>Yahweh’s eyes watch over knowledge, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he frustrates the words of the unfaithful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_13">13&#160;</span>The sluggard says, “There is a lion outside! </div>
<div class='q2'>I will be killed in the streets!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_14">14&#160;</span>The mouth of an adulteress is a deep pit. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who is under Yahweh’s wrath will fall into it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_15">15&#160;</span>Folly is bound up in the heart of a child; </div>
<div class='q2'>the rod of discipline drives it far from him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_16">16&#160;</span>Whoever oppresses the poor for his own increase and whoever gives to the rich, </div>
<div class='q2'>both come to poverty. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_17">17&#160;</span>Turn your ear, and listen to the words of the wise. </div>
<div class='q2'>Apply your heart to my teaching. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_18">18&#160;</span>For it is a pleasant thing if you keep them within you, </div>
<div class='q2'>if all of them are ready on your lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_19">19&#160;</span> I teach you today, even you, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that your trust may be in Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_20">20&#160;</span>Haven’t I written to you thirty excellent things </div>
<div class='q2'>of counsel and knowledge, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_21">21&#160;</span>To teach you truth, reliable words, </div>
<div class='q2'>to give sound answers to the ones who sent you? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_22">22&#160;</span>Don’t exploit the poor because he is poor; </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t crush the needy in court; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_23">23&#160;</span>for Yahweh will plead their case, </div>
<div class='q2'>and plunder the life of those who plunder them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_24">24&#160;</span>Don’t befriend a hot-tempered man. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t associate with one who harbors anger, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_25">25&#160;</span>lest you learn his ways </div>
<div class='q2'>and ensnare your soul. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_26">26&#160;</span>Don’t you be one of those who strike hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>of those who are collateral for debts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_27">27&#160;</span>If you don’t have means to pay, </div>
<div class='q2'>why should he take away your bed from under you? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_28">28&#160;</span>Don’t move the ancient boundary stone </div>
<div class='q2'>which your fathers have set up. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR22_29">29&#160;</span>Do you see a man skilled in his work? </div>
<div class='q2'>He will serve kings. </div>
<div class='q2'>He won’t serve obscure men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR23_0'> 23</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_1">1&#160;</span>When you sit to eat with a ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>consider diligently what is before you; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_2">2&#160;</span>put a knife to your throat </div>
<div class='q2'>if you are a man given to appetite. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t be desirous of his dainties, </div>
<div class='q2'>since they are deceitful food. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t weary yourself to be rich. </div>
<div class='q2'>In your wisdom, show restraint. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_5">5&#160;</span>Why do you set your eyes on that which is not? </div>
<div class='q2'>For it certainly sprouts wings like an eagle and flies in the sky. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t eat the food of him who has a stingy eye, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t crave his delicacies, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_7">7&#160;</span>for as he thinks about the cost, so he is. </div>
<div class='q2'>“Eat and drink!” he says to you, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his heart is not with you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_8">8&#160;</span>You will vomit up the morsel which you have eaten </div>
<div class='q2'>and waste your pleasant words. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_9">9&#160;</span>Don’t speak in the ears of a fool, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will despise the wisdom of your words. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t move the ancient boundary stone. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t encroach on the fields of the fatherless, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_11">11&#160;</span>for their Defender is strong. </div>
<div class='q2'>He will plead their case against you. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_12">12&#160;</span>Apply your heart to instruction, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your ears to the words of knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_13">13&#160;</span>Don’t withhold correction from a child. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you punish him with the rod, he will not die. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_14">14&#160;</span>Punish him with the rod, </div>
<div class='q2'>and save his soul from Sheol.<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_15">15&#160;</span>My son, if your heart is wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>then my heart will be glad, even mine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_16">16&#160;</span>Yes, my heart will rejoice </div>
<div class='q2'>when your lips speak what is right. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t let your heart envy sinners, </div>
<div class='q2'>but rather fear Yahweh all day long. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_18">18&#160;</span>Indeed surely there is a future hope, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your hope will not be cut off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_19">19&#160;</span>Listen, my son, and be wise, </div>
<div class='q2'>and keep your heart on the right path! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_20">20&#160;</span>Don’t be among ones drinking too much wine, </div>
<div class='q2'>or those who gorge themselves on meat; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_21">21&#160;</span>for the drunkard and the glutton shall become poor; </div>
<div class='q2'>and drowsiness clothes them in rags. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_22">22&#160;</span>Listen to your father who gave you life, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t despise your mother when she is old. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_23">23&#160;</span>Buy the truth, and don’t sell it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Get wisdom, discipline, and understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_24">24&#160;</span>The father of the righteous has great joy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever fathers a wise child delights in him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_25">25&#160;</span>Let your father and your mother be glad! </div>
<div class='q2'>Let her who bore you rejoice! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_26">26&#160;</span>My son, give me your heart; </div>
<div class='q2'>and let your eyes keep in my ways. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_27">27&#160;</span>For a prostitute is a deep pit; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a wayward wife is a narrow well. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_28">28&#160;</span>Yes, she lies in wait like a robber, </div>
<div class='q2'>and increases the unfaithful among men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_29">29&#160;</span>Who has woe? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has sorrow? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has strife? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has complaints? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has needless bruises? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has bloodshot eyes? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_30">30&#160;</span>Those who stay long at the wine; </div>
<div class='q2'>those who go to seek out mixed wine. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_31">31&#160;</span>Don’t look at the wine when it is red, </div>
<div class='q2'>when it sparkles in the cup, </div>
<div class='q2'>when it goes down smoothly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_32">32&#160;</span>In the end, it bites like a snake, </div>
<div class='q2'>and poisons like a viper. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_33">33&#160;</span>Your eyes will see strange things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your mind will imagine confusing things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_34">34&#160;</span>Yes, you will be as he who lies down in the middle of the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>or as he who lies on top of the rigging: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR23_35">35&#160;</span>“They hit me, and I was not hurt! </div>
<div class='q2'>They beat me, and I don’t feel it! </div>
<div class='q2'>When will I wake up? I can do it again. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will look for more.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR24_0'> 24</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t be envious of evil men, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither desire to be with them; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_2">2&#160;</span>for their hearts plot violence </div>
<div class='q2'>and their lips talk about mischief. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_3">3&#160;</span>Through wisdom a house is built; </div>
<div class='q2'>by understanding it is established; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_4">4&#160;</span>by knowledge the rooms are filled </div>
<div class='q2'>with all rare and beautiful treasure. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_5">5&#160;</span>A wise man has great power. </div>
<div class='q2'>A knowledgeable man increases strength, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_6">6&#160;</span>for by wise guidance you wage your war, </div>
<div class='q2'>and victory is in many advisors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_7">7&#160;</span>Wisdom is too high for a fool. </div>
<div class='q2'>He doesn’t open his mouth in the gate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_8">8&#160;</span>One who plots to do evil </div>
<div class='q2'>will be called a schemer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_9">9&#160;</span>The schemes of folly are sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>The mocker is detested by men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_10">10&#160;</span>If you falter in the time of trouble, </div>
<div class='q2'>your strength is small. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_11">11&#160;</span>Rescue those who are being led away to death! </div>
<div class='q2'>Indeed, hold back those who are staggering to the slaughter! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_12">12&#160;</span>If you say, “Behold, we didn’t know this,” </div>
<div class='q2'>doesn’t he who weighs the hearts consider it? </div>
<div class='q'>He who keeps your soul, doesn’t he know it? </div>
<div class='q2'>Shall he not render to every man according to his work? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_13">13&#160;</span>My son, eat honey, for it is good, </div>
<div class='q2'>the droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to your taste; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_14">14&#160;</span>so you shall know wisdom to be to your soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>If you have found it, then there will be a reward: </div>
<div class='q2'>Your hope will not be cut off. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_15">15&#160;</span>Don’t lay in wait, wicked man, against the habitation of the righteous. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t destroy his resting place; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_16">16&#160;</span>for a righteous man falls seven times and rises up again, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wicked are overthrown by calamity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_17">17&#160;</span>Don’t rejoice when your enemy falls. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t let your heart be glad when he is overthrown, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_18">18&#160;</span>lest Yahweh see it, and it displease him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he turn away his wrath from him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_19">19&#160;</span>Don’t fret yourself because of evildoers, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither be envious of the wicked; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_20">20&#160;</span>for there will be no reward to the evil man. </div>
<div class='q2'>The lamp of the wicked will be snuffed out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_21">21&#160;</span>My son, fear Yahweh and the king. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t join those who are rebellious, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_22">22&#160;</span>for their calamity will rise suddenly. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who knows what destruction may come from them both? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_23">23&#160;</span>These also are sayings of the wise: </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>To show partiality in judgment is not good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_24">24&#160;</span>He who says to the wicked, “You are righteous,” </div>
<div class='q2'>peoples will curse him, and nations will abhor him— </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_25">25&#160;</span>but it will go well with those who convict the guilty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a rich blessing will come on them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_26">26&#160;</span>An honest answer </div>
<div class='q2'>is like a kiss on the lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_27">27&#160;</span>Prepare your work outside, </div>
<div class='q2'>and get your fields ready. </div>
<div class='q2'>Afterwards, build your house. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_28">28&#160;</span>Don’t be a witness against your neighbor without cause. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t deceive with your lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_29">29&#160;</span>Don’t say, “I will do to him as he has done to me; </div>
<div class='q2'>I will repay the man according to his work.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_30">30&#160;</span>I went by the field of the sluggard, </div>
<div class='q2'>by the vineyard of the man void of understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_31">31&#160;</span>Behold, it was all grown over with thorns. </div>
<div class='q2'>Its surface was covered with nettles, </div>
<div class='q2'>and its stone wall was broken down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_32">32&#160;</span>Then I saw, and considered well. </div>
<div class='q2'>I saw, and received instruction: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_33">33&#160;</span>a little sleep, a little slumber, </div>
<div class='q2'>a little folding of the hands to sleep, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR24_34">34&#160;</span>so your poverty will come as a robber </div>
<div class='q2'>and your want as an armed man.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR25_0'>25</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_1">1&#160;</span>These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_2">2&#160;</span>It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the glory of kings is to search out a matter. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_3">3&#160;</span>As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the hearts of kings are unsearchable. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_4">4&#160;</span>Take away the dross from the silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and material comes out for the refiner. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_5">5&#160;</span>Take away the wicked from the king’s presence, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his throne will be established in righteousness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t exalt yourself in the presence of the king, </div>
<div class='q2'>or claim a place among great men; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_7">7&#160;</span>for it is better that it be said to you, “Come up here,” </div>
<div class='q2'>than that you should be put lower in the presence of the prince, </div>
<div class='q2'>whom your eyes have seen. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_8">8&#160;</span>Don’t be hasty in bringing charges to court. </div>
<div class='q2'>What will you do in the end when your neighbor shames you? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_9">9&#160;</span>Debate your case with your neighbor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t betray the confidence of another, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_10">10&#160;</span>lest one who hears it put you to shame, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your bad reputation never depart. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_11">11&#160;</span>A word fitly spoken </div>
<div class='q2'>is like apples of gold in settings of silver. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_12">12&#160;</span>As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a wise reprover to an obedient ear. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_13">13&#160;</span>As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a faithful messenger to those who send him; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he refreshes the soul of his masters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_14">14&#160;</span>As clouds and wind without rain, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who boasts of gifts deceptively. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_15">15&#160;</span>By patience a ruler is persuaded. </div>
<div class='q2'>A soft tongue breaks the bone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_16">16&#160;</span>Have you found honey? </div>
<div class='q2'>Eat as much as is sufficient for you, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you eat too much, and vomit it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_17">17&#160;</span>Let your foot be seldom in your neighbor’s house, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he be weary of you, and hate you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_18">18&#160;</span>A man who gives false testimony against his neighbor </div>
<div class='q2'>is like a club, a sword, or a sharp arrow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_19">19&#160;</span>Confidence in someone unfaithful in time of trouble </div>
<div class='q2'>is like a bad tooth or a lame foot. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_20">20&#160;</span>As one who takes away a garment in cold weather, </div>
<div class='q2'>or vinegar on soda, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is one who sings songs to a heavy heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_21">21&#160;</span>If your enemy is hungry, give him food to eat. </div>
<div class='q2'>If he is thirsty, give him water to drink; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_22">22&#160;</span>for you will heap coals of fire on his head, </div>
<div class='q2'>and Yahweh will reward you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_23">23&#160;</span>The north wind produces rain; </div>
<div class='q2'>so a backbiting tongue brings an angry face. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_24">24&#160;</span>It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop </div>
<div class='q2'>than to share a house with a contentious woman. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_25">25&#160;</span>Like cold water to a thirsty soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is good news from a far country. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_26">26&#160;</span>Like a muddied spring and a polluted well, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a righteous man who gives way before the wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_27">27&#160;</span>It is not good to eat much honey, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor is it honorable to seek one’s own honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR25_28">28&#160;</span>Like a city that is broken down and without walls </div>
<div class='q2'>is a man whose spirit is without restraint.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR26_0'> 26</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_1">1&#160;</span>Like snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, </div>
<div class='q2'>so honor is not fitting for a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_2">2&#160;</span>Like a fluttering sparrow, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a darting swallow, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the undeserved curse doesn’t come to rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_3">3&#160;</span>A whip is for the horse, </div>
<div class='q2'>a bridle for the donkey, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a rod for the back of fools! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_4">4&#160;</span>Don’t answer a fool according to his folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest you also be like him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_5">5&#160;</span>Answer a fool according to his folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he be wise in his own eyes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_6">6&#160;</span>One who sends a message by the hand of a fool </div>
<div class='q2'>is cutting off feet and drinking violence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_7">7&#160;</span>Like the legs of the lame that hang loose, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a parable in the mouth of fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_8">8&#160;</span>As one who binds a stone in a sling, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who gives honor to a fool. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_9">9&#160;</span>Like a thorn bush that goes into the hand of a drunkard, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a parable in the mouth of fools. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_10">10&#160;</span>As an archer who wounds all, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is he who hires a fool </div>
<div class='q2'>or he who hires those who pass by. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_11">11&#160;</span>As a dog that returns to his vomit, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a fool who repeats his folly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_12">12&#160;</span>Do you see a man wise in his own eyes? </div>
<div class='q2'>There is more hope for a fool than for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_13">13&#160;</span>The sluggard says, “There is a lion in the road! </div>
<div class='q2'>A fierce lion roams the streets!” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_14">14&#160;</span>As the door turns on its hinges, </div>
<div class='q2'>so does the sluggard on his bed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_15">15&#160;</span>The sluggard buries his hand in the dish. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is too lazy to bring it back to his mouth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_16">16&#160;</span>The sluggard is wiser in his own eyes </div>
<div class='q2'>than seven men who answer with discretion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_17">17&#160;</span>Like one who grabs a dog’s ears </div>
<div class='q2'>is one who passes by and meddles in a quarrel not his own. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_18">18&#160;</span>Like a madman who shoots torches, arrows, and death, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_19">19&#160;</span>is the man who deceives his neighbor and says, “Am I not joking?” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_20">20&#160;</span>For lack of wood a fire goes out. </div>
<div class='q2'>Without gossip, a quarrel dies down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_21">21&#160;</span>As coals are to hot embers, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wood to fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a contentious man to kindling strife. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_22">22&#160;</span>The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, </div>
<div class='q2'>they go down into the innermost parts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_23">23&#160;</span>Like silver dross on an earthen vessel </div>
<div class='q2'>are the lips of a fervent one with an evil heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_24">24&#160;</span>A malicious man disguises himself with his lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he harbors evil in his heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_25">25&#160;</span>When his speech is charming, don’t believe him, </div>
<div class='q2'>for there are seven abominations in his heart. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_26">26&#160;</span>His malice may be concealed by deception, </div>
<div class='q2'>but his wickedness will be exposed in the assembly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_27">27&#160;</span>Whoever digs a pit shall fall into it. </div>
<div class='q2'>Whoever rolls a stone, it will come back on him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR26_28">28&#160;</span>A lying tongue hates those it hurts; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a flattering mouth works ruin.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR27_0'> 27</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_1">1&#160;</span>Don’t boast about tomorrow; </div>
<div class='q2'>for you don’t know what a day may bring. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_2">2&#160;</span>Let another man praise you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and not your own mouth; </div>
<div class='q2'>a stranger, and not your own lips. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_3">3&#160;</span>A stone is heavy, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sand is a burden; </div>
<div class='q2'>but a fool’s provocation is heavier than both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_4">4&#160;</span>Wrath is cruel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and anger is overwhelming; </div>
<div class='q2'>but who is able to stand before jealousy? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_5">5&#160;</span>Better is open rebuke </div>
<div class='q2'>than hidden love. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_6">6&#160;</span>The wounds of a friend are faithful, </div>
<div class='q2'>although the kisses of an enemy are profuse. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_7">7&#160;</span>A full soul loathes a honeycomb; </div>
<div class='q2'>but to a hungry soul, every bitter thing is sweet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_8">8&#160;</span>As a bird that wanders from her nest, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a man who wanders from his home. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_9">9&#160;</span>Perfume and incense bring joy to the heart; </div>
<div class='q2'>so does earnest counsel from a man’s friend. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_10">10&#160;</span>Don’t forsake your friend and your father’s friend. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t go to your brother’s house in the day of your disaster. </div>
<div class='q2'>A neighbor who is near is better than a distant brother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_11">11&#160;</span>Be wise, my son, </div>
<div class='q2'>and bring joy to my heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>then I can answer my tormentor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_12">12&#160;</span>A prudent man sees danger and takes refuge; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the simple pass on, and suffer for it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_13">13&#160;</span>Take his garment when he puts up collateral for a stranger. </div>
<div class='q2'>Hold it for a wayward woman! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_14">14&#160;</span>He who blesses his neighbor with a loud voice early in the morning, </div>
<div class='q2'>it will be taken as a curse by him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_15">15&#160;</span>A continual dropping on a rainy day </div>
<div class='q2'>and a contentious wife are alike: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_16">16&#160;</span>restraining her is like restraining the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>or like grasping oil in his right hand. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_17">17&#160;</span>Iron sharpens iron; </div>
<div class='q2'>so a man sharpens his friend’s countenance. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_18">18&#160;</span>Whoever tends the fig tree shall eat its fruit. </div>
<div class='q2'>He who looks after his master shall be honored. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_19">19&#160;</span>Like water reflects a face, </div>
<div class='q2'>so a man’s heart reflects the man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_20">20&#160;</span>Sheol<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and Abaddon are never satisfied; </div>
<div class='q2'>and a man’s eyes are never satisfied. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_21">21&#160;</span>The crucible is for silver, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the furnace for gold; </div>
<div class='q2'>but man is refined by his praise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_22">22&#160;</span>Though you grind a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with grain, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet his foolishness will not be removed from him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_23">23&#160;</span>Know well the state of your flocks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pay attention to your herds, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_24">24&#160;</span>for riches are not forever, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor does the crown endure to all generations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_25">25&#160;</span>The hay is removed, and the new growth appears, </div>
<div class='q2'>the grasses of the hills are gathered in. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_26">26&#160;</span>The lambs are for your clothing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the goats are the price of a field. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR27_27">27&#160;</span>There will be plenty of goats’ milk for your food, </div>
<div class='q2'>for your family’s food, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for the nourishment of your servant girls.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR28_0'> 28</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_1">1&#160;</span>The wicked flee when no one pursues; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous are as bold as a lion. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_2">2&#160;</span>In rebellion, a land has many rulers, </div>
<div class='q2'>but order is maintained by a man of understanding and knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_3">3&#160;</span>A needy man who oppresses the poor </div>
<div class='q2'>is like a driving rain which leaves no crops. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_4">4&#160;</span>Those who forsake the law praise the wicked; </div>
<div class='q2'>but those who keep the law contend with them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_5">5&#160;</span>Evil men don’t understand justice; </div>
<div class='q2'>but those who seek Yahweh understand it fully. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_6">6&#160;</span>Better is the poor who walks in his integrity </div>
<div class='q2'>than he who is perverse in his ways, and he is rich. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_7">7&#160;</span>Whoever keeps the law is a wise son; </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who is a companion of gluttons shames his father. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_8">8&#160;</span>He who increases his wealth by excessive interest </div>
<div class='q2'>gathers it for one who has pity on the poor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_9">9&#160;</span>He who turns away his ear from hearing the law, </div>
<div class='q2'>even his prayer is an abomination. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_10">10&#160;</span>Whoever causes the upright to go astray in an evil way, </div>
<div class='q2'>he will fall into his own trap; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the blameless will inherit good. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_11">11&#160;</span>The rich man is wise in his own eyes; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the poor who has understanding sees through him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_12">12&#160;</span>When the righteous triumph, there is great glory; </div>
<div class='q2'>but when the wicked rise, men hide themselves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_13">13&#160;</span>He who conceals his sins doesn’t prosper, </div>
<div class='q2'>but whoever confesses and renounces them finds mercy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_14">14&#160;</span>Blessed is the man who always fears; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who hardens his heart falls into trouble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_15">15&#160;</span>As a roaring lion or a charging bear, </div>
<div class='q2'>so is a wicked ruler over helpless people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_16">16&#160;</span>A tyrannical ruler lacks judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>One who hates ill-gotten gain will have long days. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_17">17&#160;</span>A man who is tormented by blood guilt will be a fugitive until death. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will support him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_18">18&#160;</span>Whoever walks blamelessly is kept safe; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one with perverse ways will fall suddenly. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_19">19&#160;</span>One who works his land will have an abundance of food; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who chases fantasies will have his fill of poverty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_20">20&#160;</span>A faithful man is rich with blessings; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who is eager to be rich will not go unpunished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_21">21&#160;</span>To show partiality is not good, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet a man will do wrong for a piece of bread. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_22">22&#160;</span>A stingy man hurries after riches, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t know that poverty waits for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_23">23&#160;</span>One who rebukes a man will afterward find more favor </div>
<div class='q2'>than one who flatters with the tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_24">24&#160;</span>Whoever robs his father or his mother and says, “It’s not wrong,” </div>
<div class='q2'>is a partner with a destroyer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_25">25&#160;</span>One who is greedy stirs up strife; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who trusts in Yahweh will prosper. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_26">26&#160;</span>One who trusts in himself is a fool; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who walks in wisdom is kept safe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_27">27&#160;</span>One who gives to the poor has no lack; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who closes his eyes will have many curses. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR28_28">28&#160;</span>When the wicked rise, men hide themselves; </div>
<div class='q2'>but when they perish, the righteous thrive.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='PR29_0'> 29</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_1">1&#160;</span>He who is often rebuked and stiffens his neck </div>
<div class='q2'>will be destroyed suddenly, with no remedy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_2">2&#160;</span>When the righteous thrive, the people rejoice; </div>
<div class='q2'>but when the wicked rule, the people groan. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_3">3&#160;</span>Whoever loves wisdom brings joy to his father; </div>
<div class='q2'>but a companion of prostitutes squanders his wealth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_4">4&#160;</span>The king by justice makes the land stable, </div>
<div class='q2'>but he who takes bribes tears it down. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_5">5&#160;</span>A man who flatters his neighbor </div>
<div class='q2'>spreads a net for his feet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_6">6&#160;</span>An evil man is snared by his sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous can sing and be glad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_7">7&#160;</span>The righteous care about justice for the poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>The wicked aren’t concerned about knowledge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_8">8&#160;</span>Mockers stir up a city, </div>
<div class='q2'>but wise men turn away anger. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_9">9&#160;</span>If a wise man goes to court with a foolish man, </div>
<div class='q2'>the fool rages or scoffs, and there is no peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_10">10&#160;</span>The bloodthirsty hate a man of integrity; </div>
<div class='q2'>and they seek the life of the upright. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_11">11&#160;</span>A fool vents all of his anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a wise man brings himself under control. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_12">12&#160;</span>If a ruler listens to lies, </div>
<div class='q2'>all of his officials are wicked. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_13">13&#160;</span>The poor man and the oppressor have this in common: </div>
<div class='q2'>Yahweh gives sight to the eyes of both. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_14">14&#160;</span>The king who fairly judges the poor, </div>
<div class='q2'>his throne shall be established forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_15">15&#160;</span>The rod of correction gives wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a child left to himself causes shame to his mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_16">16&#160;</span>When the wicked increase, sin increases; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the righteous will see their downfall. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_17">17&#160;</span>Correct your son, and he will give you peace; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, he will bring delight to your soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_18">18&#160;</span>Where there is no revelation, the people cast off restraint; </div>
<div class='q2'>but one who keeps the law is blessed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_19">19&#160;</span>A servant can’t be corrected by words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Though he understands, yet he will not respond. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_20">20&#160;</span>Do you see a man who is hasty in his words? </div>
<div class='q2'>There is more hope for a fool than for him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_21">21&#160;</span>He who pampers his servant from youth </div>
<div class='q2'>will have him become a son in the end. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_22">22&#160;</span>An angry man stirs up strife, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a wrathful man abounds in sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_23">23&#160;</span>A man’s pride brings him low, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one of lowly spirit gains honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_24">24&#160;</span>Whoever is an accomplice of a thief is an enemy of his own soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>He takes an oath, but dares not testify. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_25">25&#160;</span>The fear of man proves to be a snare, </div>
<div class='q2'>but whoever puts his trust in Yahweh is kept safe. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_26">26&#160;</span>Many seek the ruler’s favor, </div>
<div class='q2'>but a man’s justice comes from Yahweh. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR29_27">27&#160;</span>A dishonest man detests the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the upright in their ways detest the wicked.  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR30_0'>30</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_1">1&#160;</span>The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, the revelation: </div>
<div class='q'>the man says to Ithiel, </div>
<div class='q2'>to Ithiel and Ucal: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_2">2&#160;</span>“Surely I am the most ignorant man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and don’t have a man’s understanding. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_3">3&#160;</span>I have not learned wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither do I have the knowledge of the Holy One. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_4">4&#160;</span>Who has ascended up into heaven, and descended? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has gathered the wind in his fists? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has bound the waters in his garment? </div>
<div class='q2'>Who has established all the ends of the earth? </div>
<div class='q2'>What is his name, and what is his son’s name, if you know? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_5">5&#160;</span>“Every word of God is flawless. </div>
<div class='q2'>He is a shield to those who take refuge in him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_6">6&#160;</span>Don’t you add to his words, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he reprove you, and you be found a liar. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_7">7&#160;</span>“Two things I have asked of you. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t deny me before I die. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_8">8&#160;</span>Remove far from me falsehood and lies. </div>
<div class='q2'>Give me neither poverty nor riches. </div>
<div class='q2'>Feed me with the food that is needful for me, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_9">9&#160;</span>lest I be full, deny you, and say, ‘Who is Yahweh?’ </div>
<div class='q2'>or lest I be poor, and steal, </div>
<div class='q2'>and so dishonor the name of my God. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_10">10&#160;</span>“Don’t slander a servant to his master, </div>
<div class='q2'>lest he curse you, and you be held guilty. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_11">11&#160;</span>There is a generation that curses their father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t bless their mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_12">12&#160;</span>There is a generation that is pure in their own eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet are not washed from their filthiness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_13">13&#160;</span>There is a generation, oh how lofty are their eyes! </div>
<div class='q2'>Their eyelids are lifted up. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_14">14&#160;</span>There is a generation whose teeth are like swords, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their jaws like knives, </div>
<div class='q2'>to devour the poor from the earth, and the needy from among men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_15">15&#160;</span>“The leech has two daughters: </div>
<div class='q2'>‘Give, give.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>“There are three things that are never satisfied; </div>
<div class='q2'>four that don’t say, ‘Enough!’: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_16">16&#160;</span>Sheol,<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>the barren womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>the earth that is not satisfied with water, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the fire that doesn’t say, ‘Enough!’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_17">17&#160;</span>“The eye that mocks at his father, </div>
<div class='q2'>and scorns obedience to his mother, </div>
<div class='q2'>the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, </div>
<div class='q2'>the young eagles shall eat it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_18">18&#160;</span>“There are three things which are too amazing for me, </div>
<div class='q2'>four which I don’t understand: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_19">19&#160;</span>The way of an eagle in the air, </div>
<div class='q2'>the way of a serpent on a rock, </div>
<div class='q2'>the way of a ship in the middle of the sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the way of a man with a maiden. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_20">20&#160;</span>“So is the way of an adulterous woman: </div>
<div class='q2'>She eats and wipes her mouth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and says, ‘I have done nothing wrong.’ </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_21">21&#160;</span>“For three things the earth trembles, </div>
<div class='q2'>and under four, it can’t bear up: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_22">22&#160;</span>For a servant when he is king, </div>
<div class='q2'>a fool when he is filled with food, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_23">23&#160;</span>for an unloved woman when she is married, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a servant who is heir to her mistress. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_24">24&#160;</span>“There are four things which are little on the earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they are exceedingly wise: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_25">25&#160;</span>The ants are not a strong people, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet they provide their food in the summer. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_26">26&#160;</span>The hyraxes are but a feeble folk, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet make they their houses in the rocks. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_27">27&#160;</span>The locusts have no king, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet they advance in ranks. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_28">28&#160;</span>You can catch a lizard with your hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet it is in kings’ palaces. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_29">29&#160;</span>“There are three things which are stately in their march, </div>
<div class='q2'>four which are stately in going: </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_30">30&#160;</span>The lion, which is mightiest among animals, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t turn away for any; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_31">31&#160;</span>the greyhound; </div>
<div class='q2'>the male goat; </div>
<div class='q2'>and the king against whom there is no rising up. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_32">32&#160;</span>“If you have done foolishly in lifting up yourself, </div>
<div class='q2'>or if you have thought evil, </div>
<div class='q'>put your hand over your mouth. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="PR30_33">33&#160;</span>For as the churning of milk produces butter, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the wringing of the nose produces blood, </div>
<div class='q2'>so the forcing of wrath produces strife.”  </div>
<div class='chapterlabel' id='PR31_0'>31</div>
<div class='p'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_1">1&#160;</span>The words of king Lemuel—the revelation which his mother taught him: </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_2">2&#160;</span>“Oh, my son! </div>
<div class='q2'>Oh, son of my womb! </div>
<div class='q2'>Oh, son of my vows! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_3">3&#160;</span>Don’t give your strength to women, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor your ways to that which destroys kings. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_4">4&#160;</span>It is not for kings, Lemuel, </div>
<div class='q2'>it is not for kings to drink wine, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor for princes to say, ‘Where is strong drink?’ </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_5">5&#160;</span>lest they drink, and forget the law, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pervert the justice due to anyone who is afflicted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_6">6&#160;</span>Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wine to the bitter in soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_7">7&#160;</span>Let him drink, and forget his poverty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and remember his misery no more. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_8">8&#160;</span>Open your mouth for the mute, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the cause of all who are left desolate. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_9">9&#160;</span>Open your mouth, judge righteously, </div>
<div class='q2'>and serve justice to the poor and needy.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_10">10&#160;</span> <a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Who can find a worthy woman? </div>
<div class='q2'>For her value is far above rubies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_11">11&#160;</span>The heart of her husband trusts in her. </div>
<div class='q2'>He shall have no lack of gain. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_12">12&#160;</span>She does him good, and not harm, </div>
<div class='q2'>all the days of her life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_13">13&#160;</span>She seeks wool and flax, </div>
<div class='q2'>and works eagerly with her hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_14">14&#160;</span>She is like the merchant ships. </div>
<div class='q2'>She brings her bread from afar. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_15">15&#160;</span>She rises also while it is yet night, </div>
<div class='q2'>gives food to her household, </div>
<div class='q2'>and portions for her servant girls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_16">16&#160;</span>She considers a field, and buys it. </div>
<div class='q2'>With the fruit of her hands, she plants a vineyard. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_17">17&#160;</span>She arms her waist with strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>and makes her arms strong. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_18">18&#160;</span>She perceives that her merchandise is profitable. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her lamp doesn’t go out by night. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_19">19&#160;</span>She lays her hands to the distaff, </div>
<div class='q2'>and her hands hold the spindle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_20">20&#160;</span>She opens her arms to the poor; </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, she extends her hands to the needy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_21">21&#160;</span>She is not afraid of the snow for her household, </div>
<div class='q2'>for all her household are clothed with scarlet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_22">22&#160;</span>She makes for herself carpets of tapestry. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her clothing is fine linen and purple. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_23">23&#160;</span>Her husband is respected in the gates, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he sits among the elders of the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_24">24&#160;</span>She makes linen garments and sells them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivers sashes to the merchant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_25">25&#160;</span>Strength and dignity are her clothing. </div>
<div class='q2'>She laughs at the time to come. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_26">26&#160;</span>She opens her mouth with wisdom. </div>
<div class='q2'>Kind instruction is on her tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_27">27&#160;</span>She looks well to the ways of her household, </div>
<div class='q2'>and doesn’t eat the bread of idleness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_28">28&#160;</span>Her children rise up and call her blessed. </div>
<div class='q2'>Her husband also praises her: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_29">29&#160;</span>“Many women do noble things, </div>
<div class='q2'>but you excel them all.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_30">30&#160;</span>Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain; </div>
<div class='q2'>but a woman who fears Yahweh, she shall be praised. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="PR31_31">31&#160;</span>Give her of the fruit of her hands! </div>
<div class='q2'>Let her works praise her in the gates! </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:7</a>
 <span class="ft">“Yahweh” is God’s proper Name, sometimes rendered “LORD” (all caps) in other translations.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_12"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR1_23"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:23</a>
 <span class="ft">“Behold”, from “הִנֵּה”, means look at, take notice, observe, see, or gaze at. It is often used as an interjection.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR2_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:5</a>
 <span class="ft">The Hebrew word rendered “God” is “אֱלֹהִ֑ים” (Elohim).</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR5_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR7_27"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:27</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR9_18"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:18</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR11_21"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:21</a>
 <span class="ft">or, seed</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR15_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:24</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR23_14"><span class="notemark">*</span> 23:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR27_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 27:20</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR30_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 30:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Sheol is the place of the dead.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#PR31_10"><span class="notemark">*</span> 31:10</a>
 <span class="ft"><a class='bibleref' href='PRO.xhtml#PR31_10'>Proverbs 31:10-31</a> form an acrostic, with each verse starting with each letter of the Hebrew alphabet, in order.</span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
