<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" dir="ltr">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<link rel="stylesheet" href="epub.css" type="text/css" />
<meta name="viewport" content="user-scalable=yes, initial-scale=1, minimum-scale=1, width=device-width, height=device-height"/>
<title>World English Bible with Deuterocanon Wisdom of Solomon 1</title>
</head>
<body dir='ltr'>
<ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='index.xhtml'>Wisdom of Solomon</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'><li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS1_0'>1</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS2_0'>2</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS3_0'>3</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS4_0'>4</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS5_0'>5</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS6_0'>6</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS7_0'>7</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS8_0'>8</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS9_0'>9</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS10_0'>10</a></li>
</ul><ul class='tnav'>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS11_0'>11</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS12_0'>12</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS13_0'>13</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_0'>14</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS15_0'>15</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS16_0'>16</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS17_0'>17</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS18_0'>18</a></li>
<li><a href='WIS.xhtml#WS19_0'>19</a></li>
</ul>

<div class='main' id='WS0_0'>

<div class='mt'>THE WISDOM OF SOLOMON </div>
<div class='ip'>The <span class='bk'>Wisdom of Solomon</span> is recognized as Deuterocanonical Scripture by the Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Russian Orthodox Churches.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS1_0'> 1</div>
<div class='q'>

<span class="verse" id="WS1_1">1&#160;</span>Love righteousness, all you who are judges of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>Think of the Lord<a href='#FN1' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> with a good mind. </div>
<div class='q'>Seek him in singleness of heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_2">2&#160;</span>because he is found by those who don’t put him to the test, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is manifested to those who trust him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_3">3&#160;</span>for crooked thoughts separate from God. </div>
<div class='q2'>His Power convicts when it is tested, </div>
<div class='q2'>and exposes the foolish; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_4">4&#160;</span>because wisdom will not enter into a soul that devises evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor dwell in a body that is enslaved by sin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_5">5&#160;</span>For a holy spirit of discipline will flee deceit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will depart from thoughts that are without understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be ashamed when unrighteousness has come in. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_6">6&#160;</span>For<a href='#FN2' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> wisdom is a spirit who loves man, </div>
<div class='q2'>and she will not hold a<a href='#FN3' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> blasphemer guiltless for his lips, </div>
<div class='q2'>because God is witness of his inmost self, </div>
<div class='q2'>and is a true overseer of his heart, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a hearer of his tongue. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_7">7&#160;</span>Because the spirit of the Lord has filled<a href='#FN4' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> the world, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that which holds all things together knows what is said. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_8">8&#160;</span>Therefore no one who utters unrighteous things will be unseen; </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN5' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> neither will Justice, when it convicts, pass him by. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_9">9&#160;</span>For in his counsels the ungodly will be searched out, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the sound of his words will come to the Lord to bring his lawless deeds to conviction; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_10">10&#160;</span>because a jealous ear listens to all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the noise of murmurings is not hidden. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_11">11&#160;</span>Beware then of unprofitable murmuring, </div>
<div class='q2'>and keep your tongue from slander; </div>
<div class='q2'>because no secret utterance will go on its way void, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a lying mouth destroys a soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_12">12&#160;</span>Don’t court death in the error of your life. </div>
<div class='q2'>Don’t draw destruction upon yourselves by the works of your hands; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_13">13&#160;</span>because God didn’t make death, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither does he delight when the living perish. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_14">14&#160;</span>For he created all things that they might have being. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN6' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>The generative powers of the world are wholesome, </div>
<div class='q2'>and there is no poison of destruction in them, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor has Hades<a href='#FN7' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> royal dominion upon earth; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_15">15&#160;</span>for righteousness is immortal, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS1_16">16&#160;</span>but ungodly men by their hands and their words summon<a href='#FN8' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a>death; </div>
<div class='q2'>deeming him a friend they<a href='#FN9' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> pined away. </div>
<div class='q'>They made a covenant with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they are worthy to belong with him. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS2_0'> 2</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_1">1&#160;</span>For they said<a href='#FN10' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> within themselves, with unsound reasoning, </div>
<div class='q2'>“Our life is short and sorrowful. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is no healing when a man comes to his end, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no one was ever known who<a href='#FN11' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> was released from Hades. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_2">2&#160;</span>Because we were born by mere chance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and hereafter we will be as though we had never been, </div>
<div class='q2'>because the breath in our nostrils is smoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>and reason is a spark kindled by the beating of our heart, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_3">3&#160;</span>which being extinguished, the body will be turned into ashes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the spirit will be dispersed as thin air. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_4">4&#160;</span>Our name will be forgotten in time. </div>
<div class='q2'>No one will remember our works. </div>
<div class='q2'>Our life will pass away as the traces of a cloud, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be scattered as is a mist, </div>
<div class='q2'>when it is chased by the rays of the sun, </div>
<div class='q2'>and<a href='#FN12' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> overcome by its heat. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_5">5&#160;</span>For our allotted time is the passing of a shadow, </div>
<div class='q2'>and our end doesn’t retreat, </div>
<div class='q2'>because it is securely sealed, and no one<a href='#FN13' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> turns it back. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_6">6&#160;</span>“Come therefore and let’s enjoy the good things that exist. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s use the creation earnestly as in our youth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_7">7&#160;</span>Let’s fill ourselves with costly wine and perfumes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and let no spring flower pass us by. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_8">8&#160;</span>Let’s crown ourselves with rosebuds before they wither. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_9">9&#160;</span>Let none of us go without his share in our proud revelry. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s leave tokens of mirth everywhere, </div>
<div class='q2'>because this is our portion, and this is our lot. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_10">10&#160;</span>Let’s oppress the righteous poor. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s not spare the widow, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor regard the gray hair of the old man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_11">11&#160;</span>But let our strength be a law of righteousness; </div>
<div class='q2'>for that which is weak is proven useless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_12">12&#160;</span>But let’s lie in wait for the righteous man, </div>
<div class='q2'>because he annoys us, </div>
<div class='q2'>is contrary to our works, </div>
<div class='q2'>reproaches us with sins against the law, </div>
<div class='q2'>and charges us with sins against our training. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_13">13&#160;</span>He professes to have knowledge of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and calls himself a child of the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_14">14&#160;</span>He became to us a reproof of our thoughts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_15">15&#160;</span>He is grievous to us even to look at, </div>
<div class='q2'>because his life is unlike other men’s, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his paths are strange. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_16">16&#160;</span>We were regarded by him as something worthless, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he abstains from our ways as from uncleanness. </div>
<div class='q2'>He calls the latter end of the righteous happy. </div>
<div class='q2'>He boasts that God is his father. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_17">17&#160;</span>Let’s see if his words are true. </div>
<div class='q2'>Let’s test what will happen at the end of his life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_18">18&#160;</span>For if the righteous man is God’s son, he will uphold him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will deliver him out of the hand of his adversaries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_19">19&#160;</span>Let’s test him with insult and torture, </div>
<div class='q2'>that we may find out how gentle he is, </div>
<div class='q2'>and test his patience. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_20">20&#160;</span>Let’s condemn him to a shameful death, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will be protected, according to his words.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_21">21&#160;</span>Thus they reasoned, and they were led astray; </div>
<div class='q2'>for their wickedness blinded them, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_22">22&#160;</span>and they didn’t know the mysteries of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither did they hope for wages of holiness, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor did they discern that there is a prize for blameless souls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_23">23&#160;</span>Because God created man for incorruption, </div>
<div class='q2'>and made him an image of his own everlastingness; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS2_24">24&#160;</span>but death entered into the world by the envy of the devil, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who belong to him experience it.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS3_0'> 3</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_1">1&#160;</span>But the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and no torment will touch them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_2">2&#160;</span>In the eyes of the foolish they seemed to have died. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their departure was considered a disaster, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_3">3&#160;</span>and their travel away from us ruin, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they are in peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_4">4&#160;</span>For even if in the sight of men they are punished, </div>
<div class='q2'>their hope is full of immortality. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_5">5&#160;</span>Having borne a little chastening, they will receive great good; </div>
<div class='q2'>because God tested them, and found them worthy of himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_6">6&#160;</span>He tested them like gold in the furnace, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he accepted them as a whole burnt offering. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_7">7&#160;</span>In the time of their visitation they will shine. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will run back and forth like sparks among stubble. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_8">8&#160;</span>They will judge nations and have dominion over peoples. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Lord will reign over them forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_9">9&#160;</span>Those who trust him will understand truth. </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN14' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> The faithful will live with him in love, </div>
<div class='q2'>because grace and mercy are with his chosen ones. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_10">10&#160;</span>But the ungodly will be punished even as their reasoning deserves, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who neglected righteousness and revolted from the Lord; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_11">11&#160;</span>for he who despises wisdom and discipline is miserable. </div>
<div class='q'>Their hope is void and their toils unprofitable. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their works are useless. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_12">12&#160;</span>Their wives are foolish and their children are wicked. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_13">13&#160;</span>Their descendants are cursed. </div>
<div class='q'>For the barren woman who is undefiled is happy, </div>
<div class='q2'>she who has not conceived in transgression. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will have fruit when God examines of souls. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_14">14&#160;</span>So is the eunuch which has done no lawless deed with his hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor imagined wicked things against the Lord; </div>
<div class='q'>for a precious gift will be given to him for his faithfulness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a delightful inheritance in the Lord’s sanctuary. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_15">15&#160;</span>For good labors have fruit of great renown. </div>
<div class='q2'>The root of understanding can’t fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_16">16&#160;</span>But children of adulterers will not come to maturity. </div>
<div class='q2'>The seed of an unlawful union will vanish away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_17">17&#160;</span>For if they live long, they will not be esteemed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the end, their old age will be without honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_18">18&#160;</span>If they die young, they will have no hope, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor consolation in the day of judgment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS3_19">19&#160;</span>For the end of an unrighteous generation is always grievous.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS4_0'> 4</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_1">1&#160;</span>It is better to be childless with virtue, </div>
<div class='q2'>for immortality is in the memory of virtue, </div>
<div class='q2'>because it is recognized both before God and before men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_2">2&#160;</span>When it is present, people imitate it. </div>
<div class='q2'>They long after it when it has departed. </div>
<div class='q'><a href='#FN15' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>Throughout all time it marches, crowned in triumph, </div>
<div class='q2'>victorious in the competition for the prizes that are undefiled. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_3">3&#160;</span>But the multiplying brood of the ungodly will be of no profit, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their illegitimate offshoots won’t take deep root, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor will they establish a sure hold. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_4">4&#160;</span>For even if they grow branches and flourish for a season, </div>
<div class='q2'>standing unsure, they will be shaken by the wind. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will be uprooted by the violence of winds. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_5">5&#160;</span>Their branches will be broken off before they come to maturity. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their fruit will be useless, </div>
<div class='q2'>never ripe to eat, and fit for nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_6">6&#160;</span>For unlawfully conceived children are witnesses of wickedness </div>
<div class='q2'>against parents when they are investigated. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_7">7&#160;</span>But a righteous man, even if he dies before his time, will be at rest. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_8">8&#160;</span>For honorable old age is not that which stands in length of time, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor is its measure given by number of years, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_9">9&#160;</span>but understanding is gray hair to men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an unspotted life is ripe old age. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_10">10&#160;</span>Being found well-pleasing to God, someone was loved. </div>
<div class='q2'>While living among sinners he was transported. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_11">11&#160;</span>He was caught away, lest evil should change his understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>or guile deceive his soul. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_12">12&#160;</span>For the fascination of wickedness obscures the things which are good, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the whirl of desire perverts an innocent mind. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_13">13&#160;</span>Being made perfect quickly, </div>
<div class='q2'>he filled a long time; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_14">14&#160;</span>for his soul was pleasing to the Lord. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore he hurried out of the midst of wickedness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_15">15&#160;</span>But the peoples saw and didn’t understand, </div>
<div class='q2'>not considering this, that grace and mercy are with his chosen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that he visits his holy ones; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_16">16&#160;</span>but a righteous man who is dead will condemn the ungodly who are living, </div>
<div class='q2'>and youth who is quickly perfected will condemn the many years of an unrighteous man’s old age. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_17">17&#160;</span>For the ungodly will see a wise man’s end, </div>
<div class='q2'>and won’t understand what the Lord planned for him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and why he safely kept him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_18">18&#160;</span>They will see, and they will despise; </div>
<div class='q2'>but the Lord will laugh them to scorn. </div>
<div class='q'>After this, they will become a dishonored carcass </div>
<div class='q2'>and a reproach among the dead forever; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_19">19&#160;</span>because he will dash them speechless to the ground, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will shake them from the foundations. </div>
<div class='q'>They will lie utterly waste. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will be in anguish </div>
<div class='q2'>and their memory will perish. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS4_20">20&#160;</span>They will come with coward fear when their sins are counted. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their lawless deeds will convict them to their face.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS5_0'> 5</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_1">1&#160;</span>Then the righteous man will stand in great boldness </div>
<div class='q2'>before the face of those who afflicted him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who make his labors of no account. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_2">2&#160;</span>When they see him, they will be troubled with terrible fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will be amazed at the marvel of salvation. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_3">3&#160;</span>They will speak among themselves repenting, </div>
<div class='q2'>and for distress of spirit they will groan, </div>
<div class='q2'>“This was he whom we used to hold in derision, </div>
<div class='q2'>as a parable of reproach. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_4">4&#160;</span>We fools considered his life madness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and his end without honor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_5">5&#160;</span>How was he counted among sons of God? </div>
<div class='q2'>How is his lot among saints? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_6">6&#160;</span>Truly we went astray from the way of truth. </div>
<div class='q2'>The light of righteousness didn’t shine for us. </div>
<div class='q2'>The sun didn’t rise for us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_7">7&#160;</span>We<a href='#FN16' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> took our fill of the paths of lawlessness and destruction. </div>
<div class='q2'>We traveled through trackless deserts, </div>
<div class='q2'>but we didn’t know the Lord’s way. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_8">8&#160;</span>What did our arrogance profit us? </div>
<div class='q2'>What good have riches and boasting brought us? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_9">9&#160;</span>Those things all passed away as a shadow, </div>
<div class='q2'>like a rumor that runs by, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_10">10&#160;</span>like a ship passing through the billowy water, </div>
<div class='q2'>which, when it has gone by, there is no trace to be found, </div>
<div class='q2'>no pathway of its keel in the waves. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_11">11&#160;</span>Or it is like when a bird flies through the air, </div>
<div class='q2'>no evidence of its passage is found, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the light wind, lashed with the stroke of its pinions, </div>
<div class='q2'>and torn apart with the violent rush of the moving wings, is passed through. </div>
<div class='q2'>Afterwards no sign of its coming remains. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_12">12&#160;</span>Or it is like when an arrow is shot at a mark, </div>
<div class='q2'>the air it divided closes up again immediately, </div>
<div class='q2'>so that men don’t know where it passed through. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_13">13&#160;</span>So we also, as soon as we were born, ceased to be; </div>
<div class='q2'>and we had no sign of virtue to show, </div>
<div class='q2'>but we were utterly consumed in our wickedness.” </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_14">14&#160;</span>Because the hope of the ungodly man is like chaff carried by the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>and<a href='#FN17' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> as<a href='#FN18' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> foam vanishing before a tempest; </div>
<div class='q2'>and is scattered like smoke by the wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>and passes by as the remembrance of a guest who stays just a day. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_15">15&#160;</span>But the righteous live forever. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their reward is in the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the care for them with the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_16">16&#160;</span>Therefore they will receive the crown of royal dignity </div>
<div class='q2'>and the diadem of beauty from the Lord’s hand, </div>
<div class='q'>because he will cover them with his right hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he will shield them with his arm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_17">17&#160;</span>He will take his zeal as complete armor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will make the whole creation his weapons to punish his enemies: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_18">18&#160;</span>He will put on righteousness as a breastplate, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will wear impartial judgment as a helmet. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_19">19&#160;</span>He will take holiness as an invincible shield. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_20">20&#160;</span>He will sharpen stern wrath for a sword. </div>
<div class='q2'>The universe will go with him to fight against his frenzied foes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_21">21&#160;</span>Shafts of lightning will fly with true aim. </div>
<div class='q2'>They will leap to the mark from the clouds, as from a well-drawn bow. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_22">22&#160;</span>Hailstones full of wrath will be hurled as from a catapult. </div>
<div class='q2'>The water of the sea will be angered against them. </div>
<div class='q2'>Rivers will sternly overwhelm them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS5_23">23&#160;</span>A mighty wind will encounter them. </div>
<div class='q2'>It will winnow them away like a tempest. </div>
<div class='q'>So lawlessness will make all the land desolate. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their evil-doing will overturn the thrones of princes.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS6_0'> 6</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_1">1&#160;</span>Hear therefore, you kings, and understand. </div>
<div class='q2'>Learn, you judges of the ends of the earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_2">2&#160;</span>Give ear, you rulers who have dominion over many people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and make your boast<a href='#FN19' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> in multitudes of nations, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_3">3&#160;</span>because your dominion was given to you from the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your sovereignty from the Most High. </div>
<div class='q'>He will search out your works, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will inquire about your plans, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_4">4&#160;</span>because being officers of his kingdom, you didn’t judge rightly, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor did you keep the law, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor did you walk according to God’s counsel. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_5">5&#160;</span>He will come upon you awfully and swiftly, </div>
<div class='q2'>because a stern judgment comes on those who are in high places. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_6">6&#160;</span>For the man of low estate may be pardoned in mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>but mighty men will be mightily tested. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_7">7&#160;</span>For the Sovereign Lord of all will not be impressed with anyone, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither will he show deference to greatness; </div>
<div class='q'>because it is he who made both small and great, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cares about them all; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_8">8&#160;</span>but the scrutiny that comes upon the powerful is strict. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore, my words are to you, O princes, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you may learn wisdom and not fall away. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_10">10&#160;</span>For those who have kept the things that are holy in holiness will be made holy. </div>
<div class='q2'>Those who have been taught them will find what to say in defense. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore set your desire on my words. </div>
<div class='q2'>Long for them, and you princes will be instructed. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_12">12&#160;</span>Wisdom is radiant and doesn’t fade away; </div>
<div class='q2'>and is easily seen by those who love her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and found by those who seek her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_13">13&#160;</span>She anticipates those who desire her, making herself known. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_14">14&#160;</span>He who rises up early to seek her won’t have difficulty, </div>
<div class='q2'>for he will find her sitting at his gates. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_15">15&#160;</span>For to think upon her is perfection of understanding, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he who watches for her will quickly be free from care; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_16">16&#160;</span>because she herself goes around, seeking those who are worthy of her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in their paths she appears to them graciously, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in every purpose she meets them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_17">17&#160;</span>For her true beginning is desire for instruction; </div>
<div class='q2'>and desire for instruction is love. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_18">18&#160;</span>And love is observance of her laws. </div>
<div class='q2'>To give heed to her laws confirms immortality. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_19">19&#160;</span>Immortality brings closeness to God. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_20">20&#160;</span>So then desire for wisdom promotes to a kingdom. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_21">21&#160;</span>If therefore you delight in thrones and sceptres, you princes of peoples, </div>
<div class='q2'>honor wisdom, that you may reign forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_22">22&#160;</span>But what wisdom is, and how she came into being, I will declare. </div>
<div class='q2'>I won’t hide mysteries from you; </div>
<div class='q2'>but I will explore from her first beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>bring the knowledge of her into clear light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will not pass by the truth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_23">23&#160;</span>Indeed, I won’t travel with consuming envy, </div>
<div class='q2'>because envy will have no fellowship with wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_24">24&#160;</span>But a multitude of wise men is salvation to the world, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an understanding king is stability for his people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS6_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore be instructed by my words, and you will profit.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS7_0'> 7</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_1">1&#160;</span>I myself am also<a href='#FN20' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> mortal, like everyone else, </div>
<div class='q2'>and am a descendant of one formed first and born of the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_2">2&#160;</span>I molded into flesh in the time of ten months in my mother’s womb, </div>
<div class='q2'>being compacted in blood from the seed of man and pleasure of marriage. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_3">3&#160;</span>I also, when I was born, drew in the common air, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fell upon the kindred earth, </div>
<div class='q'>uttering, like all, for my first voice, the same cry. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_4">4&#160;</span>I was nursed with care in swaddling clothes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_5">5&#160;</span>For no king had a different beginning, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_6">6&#160;</span>but all men have one entrance into life, and a common departure. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_7">7&#160;</span>For this cause I prayed, and understanding was given to me. </div>
<div class='q2'>I asked, and a spirit of wisdom came to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_8">8&#160;</span>I preferred her before sceptres and thrones. </div>
<div class='q2'>I considered riches nothing in comparison to her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_9">9&#160;</span>Neither did I liken to her any priceless gem, </div>
<div class='q2'>because all gold in her presence is a little sand, </div>
<div class='q2'>and silver will be considered as clay before her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_10">10&#160;</span>I loved her more than health and beauty, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I chose to have her rather than light, </div>
<div class='q2'>because her bright shining is never laid to sleep. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_11">11&#160;</span>All good things came to me with her, </div>
<div class='q2'>and innumerable riches are in her hands. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_12">12&#160;</span>And I rejoiced over them all because wisdom leads them; </div>
<div class='q2'>although I didn’t know that she was their mother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_13">13&#160;</span>As I learned without guile, I impart without grudging. </div>
<div class='q2'>I don’t hide her riches. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_14">14&#160;</span>For she is a treasure for men that doesn’t fail, </div>
<div class='q2'>and those who use it obtain friendship with God, </div>
<div class='q2'>commended by the gifts which they present through discipline. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_15">15&#160;</span>But may God grant that I may speak his judgment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to conceive thoughts worthy of what has been given me; </div>
<div class='q2'>because he is one who guides even wisdom and who corrects the wise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_16">16&#160;</span>For both we and our words are in his hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>with all understanding and skill in various crafts. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_17">17&#160;</span>For he himself gave me an unerring knowledge of the things that are, </div>
<div class='q2'>to know the structure of the universe and the operation of the elements; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_18">18&#160;</span>the beginning, end, and middle of times; </div>
<div class='q2'>the alternations of the solstices and the changes of seasons; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_19">19&#160;</span>the circuits of years and the positions of stars; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_20">20&#160;</span>the natures of living creatures and the raging of wild beasts; </div>
<div class='q2'>the violence of<a href='#FN21' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> winds and the thoughts of men; </div>
<div class='q2'>the diversities of plants and the virtues of roots. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_21">21&#160;</span>All things that are either secret or manifest I learned, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_22">22&#160;</span>for wisdom, that is the architect of all things, taught me. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>For there is in her a spirit that is quick to understand, holy, </div>
<div class='q2'>unique, manifold, subtle, freely moving, clear in utterance, unpolluted, </div>
<div class='q2'>distinct, invulnerable, loving what is good, keen, unhindered, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_23">23&#160;</span>beneficent, loving toward man, steadfast, sure, free from care, all-powerful, all-surveying, </div>
<div class='q2'>and penetrating through all spirits that are quick to understand, pure, most subtle. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_24">24&#160;</span>For wisdom is more mobile than any motion. </div>
<div class='q2'>Yes, she pervades and penetrates all things by reason of her purity. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_25">25&#160;</span>For she is a breath of the power of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a pure emanation of the glory of the Almighty. </div>
<div class='q'>Therefore nothing defiled can find entrance into her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_26">26&#160;</span>For she is a reflection of everlasting light, </div>
<div class='q2'>an unspotted mirror of the working of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and an image of his goodness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_27">27&#160;</span>Although she is one, she has power to do all things. </div>
<div class='q2'>Remaining in herself, she renews all things. </div>
<div class='q'>From generation to generation passing into holy souls, </div>
<div class='q2'>she makes friends of God and prophets. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_28">28&#160;</span>For God loves nothing as much as one who dwells with wisdom. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_29">29&#160;</span>For she is fairer than the sun, </div>
<div class='q2'>and above all the constellations of the stars. </div>
<div class='q2'>She is better than light. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS7_30">30&#160;</span>For daylight yields to night, </div>
<div class='q2'>but evil does not prevail against wisdom.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS8_0'> 8</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_1">1&#160;</span>But she reaches from one end to the other with full strength, </div>
<div class='q2'>and orders all things well. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_2">2&#160;</span>I loved her and sought her from my youth. </div>
<div class='q2'>I sought to take her for my bride. </div>
<div class='q2'>I became enamoured by her beauty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_3">3&#160;</span>She glorifies her noble birth by living with God. </div>
<div class='q2'>The Sovereign Lord of all loves her. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_4">4&#160;</span>For she is initiated into the knowledge of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and she chooses his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_5">5&#160;</span>But if riches are a desired possession in life, </div>
<div class='q2'>what is richer than wisdom, which makes all things? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_6">6&#160;</span> And if understanding is effective, </div>
<div class='q2'>who more than<a href='#FN22' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> wisdom is an architect of the things that exist? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_7">7&#160;</span>If a man loves righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN23' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a>the fruits of wisdom’s labor are virtues, </div>
<div class='q2'>for she teaches soberness, understanding, righteousness, and courage. </div>
<div class='q2'>There is nothing in life more profitable for people than these. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_8">8&#160;</span>And if anyone longs for wide experience, </div>
<div class='q2'>she knows the things of old, and infers the things to come. </div>
<div class='q2'>She understands subtleties of speeches and interpretations of dark sayings. </div>
<div class='q2'>She foresees signs and wonders, and the issues of seasons and times. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_9">9&#160;</span>Therefore I determined to take her to live with me, </div>
<div class='q2'>knowing that she is one who would give me good counsel, </div>
<div class='q2'>and encourage me in cares and grief. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_10">10&#160;</span>Because of her, I will have glory among multitudes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and honor in the sight of elders, though I am young. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_11">11&#160;</span>I will be found keen when I give judgment. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will be admired in the presence of rulers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_12">12&#160;</span>When I am silent, they will wait for me. </div>
<div class='q2'>When I open my lips, they will heed what I say. </div>
<div class='q2'>If I continue speaking, they will put their hands on their mouths. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_13">13&#160;</span>Because of her, I will have immortality, </div>
<div class='q2'>and leave behind an eternal memory to those who come after me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_14">14&#160;</span>I will govern peoples. </div>
<div class='q2'>Nations will be subjected to me. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_15">15&#160;</span>Dreaded monarchs will fear me when they hear of me. </div>
<div class='q2'>Among the people, I will show myself to be good, and courageous in war. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_16">16&#160;</span>When I come into my house, I will find rest with her. </div>
<div class='q2'>For conversation with her has no bitterness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and living with her has no pain, but gladness and joy. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_17">17&#160;</span>When I considered these things in myself, </div>
<div class='q2'>and thought in my heart how immortality is in kinship to wisdom, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_18">18&#160;</span>and in her friendship is good delight, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the labors of her hands is wealth that doesn’t fail, </div>
<div class='q2'>and understanding is in her companionship, </div>
<div class='q2'>and great renown in having fellowship with her words, </div>
<div class='q2'>I went about seeking how to take her to myself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_19">19&#160;</span>Now I was a clever child, and received a good soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_20">20&#160;</span>Or rather, being good, I came into an undefiled body. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS8_21">21&#160;</span>But perceiving that I could not otherwise possess wisdom unless God gave her to me— </div>
<div class='q2'>yes, and to know and understand by whom the grace is given— </div>
<div class='q2'>I pleaded with the Lord and implored him, and with my whole heart I said:  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS9_0'> 9</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_1">1&#160;</span>“O God of my ancestors and Lord of mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>who made all things by your word; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_2">2&#160;</span>and by your wisdom you formed man, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he should have dominion over the creatures that were made by you, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_3">3&#160;</span>and rule the world in holiness and righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and execute judgment in uprightness of soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_4">4&#160;</span>give me wisdom, her who sits by you on your thrones. </div>
<div class='q'>Don’t reject me from among your<a href='#FN24' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> servants, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_5">5&#160;</span>because I am your servant and the son of your handmaid, </div>
<div class='q2'>a weak and short-lived man, </div>
<div class='q2'>with little power to understand judgment and laws. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_6">6&#160;</span>For even if a man is perfect among the sons of men, </div>
<div class='q2'>if the wisdom that comes from you is not with him, he will count for nothing. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_7">7&#160;</span>You chose me to be king of your people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a judge for your sons and daughters. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_8">8&#160;</span>You gave a command to build a sanctuary on your holy mountain, </div>
<div class='q2'>and<a href='#FN25' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> an altar in the city where you live, </div>
<div class='q2'>a copy of the holy tent which you prepared from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_9">9&#160;</span>Wisdom is with you and knows your works, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was present when you were making the world, </div>
<div class='q2'>and understands what is pleasing in your eyes, </div>
<div class='q2'>and what is right according to your commandments. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_10">10&#160;</span>Send her from the holy heavens, </div>
<div class='q2'>and ask her to come from the throne of your glory, </div>
<div class='q2'>that being present with me she may work, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I may learn what pleases you well. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_11">11&#160;</span>For she knows all things and understands, </div>
<div class='q2'>and she will guide me prudently in my actions. </div>
<div class='q2'>She will guard me in her glory. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_12">12&#160;</span>So my works will be acceptible. </div>
<div class='q2'>I will judge your people righteously, </div>
<div class='q2'>and I will be worthy of my father’s<a href='#FN26' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> throne. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_13">13&#160;</span>For what man will know the counsel of God? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who will conceive what the Lord wills? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_14">14&#160;</span>For the thoughts of mortals are unstable, </div>
<div class='q2'>and our plans are prone to fail. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_15">15&#160;</span>For a corruptible body weighs down the soul. </div>
<div class='q2'>The earthy tent burdens a mind that is full of cares. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_16">16&#160;</span>We can hardly guess the things that are on earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>and we find the things that are close at hand with labor; </div>
<div class='q2'>but who has traced out the things that are in the heavens? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_17">17&#160;</span>Who gained knowledge of your counsel, unless you gave wisdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and sent your holy spirit from on high? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS9_18">18&#160;</span>It was thus that the ways of those who are on earth were corrected, </div>
<div class='q2'>and men were taught the things that are pleasing to you. </div>
<div class='q2'>They were saved through wisdom.” </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS10_0'> 10</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_1">1&#160;</span> <a href='#FN27' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> Wisdom guarded to the end the first formed father of the world, who was created alone, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered him out of his own transgression, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_2">2&#160;</span>and gave him strength to rule over all things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_3">3&#160;</span>But when an unrighteous man fell away from her in his anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>he perished himself in the rage with which he killed his brother. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_4">4&#160;</span>When for his cause the earth was drowning with a flood, </div>
<div class='q'>wisdom again saved it, </div>
<div class='q'>guiding the righteous man’s course by a paltry piece of wood. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_5">5&#160;</span>Moreover, when nations consenting together in wickedness had been confounded, </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN28' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> wisdom knew the righteous man, and preserved him blameless to God, </div>
<div class='q2'>and kept him strong when his heart yearned toward his child. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_6">6&#160;</span>While the ungodly were perishing, <a href='#FN29' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> wisdom delivered a righteous man, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he fled from the fire that descended out of heaven on the five cities. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_7">7&#160;</span>To whose wickedness a smoking waste still witnesses, </div>
<div class='q2'>and plants bearing fair fruit that doesn’t ripen, </div>
<div class='q2'>a disbelieving soul has a memorial: a standing pillar of salt. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_8">8&#160;</span>For having passed wisdom by, </div>
<div class='q2'>not only were they disabled from recognising the things which are good, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they also left behind them for their life a monument of their folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the end that where they stumbled, they might fail even to be unseen; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_9">9&#160;</span>but wisdom delivered those who waited on her out of troubles. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_10">10&#160;</span>When a righteous man was a fugitive from a brother’s wrath,<a href='#FN30' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> wisdom guided him in straight paths. </div>
<div class='q2'>She showed him God’s kingdom, and gave him knowledge of holy things. </div>
<div class='q2'>She prospered him in his toils, and multiplied the fruits of his labor. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_11">11&#160;</span>When in their covetousness men dealt harshly with him, </div>
<div class='q2'>she stood by him and made him rich. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_12">12&#160;</span>She guarded him from enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and she kept him safe from those who lay in wait. </div>
<div class='q2'>Over his severe conflict, she watched as judge, </div>
<div class='q2'>that he might know that godliness is more powerful than every one. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_13">13&#160;</span>When a righteous man was sold,<a href='#FN31' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> wisdom didn’t forsake him, </div>
<div class='q2'>but she delivered him from sin. </div>
<div class='q2'>She went down with him into a dungeon, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_14">14&#160;</span>and in bonds she didn’t depart from him, </div>
<div class='q2'>until she brought him the sceptre of a kingdom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and authority over those that dealt like a tyrant with him. </div>
<div class='q2'>She also showed those who had mockingly accused him to be false, </div>
<div class='q2'>and gave him eternal glory. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_15">15&#160;</span> <a href='#FN32' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> Wisdom delivered a holy people and a blameless seed from a nation of oppressors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_16">16&#160;</span>She entered into the soul of a servant of the Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and withstood terrible kings in wonders and signs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_17">17&#160;</span>She rendered to holy men a reward of their toils. </div>
<div class='q2'>She guided them along a marvelous way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and became to them a covering in the day-time, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a starry flame through the night. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_18">18&#160;</span>She brought them over the Red sea, </div>
<div class='q2'>and led them through much water; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_19">19&#160;</span>but she drowned their enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>and she cast them up from the bottom of the deep. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_20">20&#160;</span>Therefore the righteous plundered the ungodly, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they sang praise to your holy name, O Lord, </div>
<div class='q2'>and extolled with one accord your hand that fought for them, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS10_21">21&#160;</span>because wisdom opened the mouth of the mute, </div>
<div class='q'>and made the tongues of babes to speak clearly. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS11_0'> 11</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_1">1&#160;</span>Wisdom prospered their works in the hand of a holy prophet. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_2">2&#160;</span>They traveled through a desert without inhabitant, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they pitched their tents in trackless regions. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_3">3&#160;</span>They withstood enemies and repelled foes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_4">4&#160;</span>They thirsted, and they called upon you, </div>
<div class='q2'>and water was given to them out of the<a href='#FN33' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> flinty rock, </div>
<div class='q2'>and healing of their thirst out of the hard stone. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_5">5&#160;</span>For by what things their foes were punished, </div>
<div class='q2'>by these they in their need were benefited. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_6">6&#160;</span>When enemies were troubled with clotted blood </div>
<div class='q2'>instead of a river’s ever-flowing fountain, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_7">7&#160;</span>to rebuke the decree for the slaying of babies, </div>
<div class='q2'>you gave them abundant water beyond all hope, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_8">8&#160;</span>having shown by the thirst which they had suffered </div>
<div class='q2'>how you punished the adversaries. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_9">9&#160;</span>For when they were tried, although chastened in mercy, </div>
<div class='q2'>they learned how the ungodly were tormented, being judged with wrath. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_10">10&#160;</span>For you tested these as a father admonishing them; </div>
<div class='q2'>but you searched out those as a stern king condemning them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_11">11&#160;</span>Yes and whether they were far off or near, </div>
<div class='q2'>they were equally distressed; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_12">12&#160;</span>for a double grief seized them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a groaning at the memory of things past. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_13">13&#160;</span>For when they heard that through their own punishments the others benefited, </div>
<div class='q2'>they recognized the Lord. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_14">14&#160;</span>For him who long before was thrown out and exposed they stopped mocking. </div>
<div class='q2'>In the end of what happened, they marveled, </div>
<div class='q2'>having thirsted in another manner than the righteous. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_15">15&#160;</span>But in return for the senseless imaginings of their unrighteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>wherein they were led astray to worship irrational reptiles and wretched vermin, </div>
<div class='q2'>you sent upon them a multitude of irrational creatures to punish them, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_16">16&#160;</span>that they might learn that by what things a man sins, by these he is punished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_17">17&#160;</span>For your all-powerful hand </div>
<div class='q2'>that created the world out of formless matter </div>
<div class='q2'>didn’t lack means to send upon them a multitude of bears, fierce lions, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_18">18&#160;</span>or newly-created and unknown wild beasts, full of rage, </div>
<div class='q2'>either breathing out a blast of fiery breath, </div>
<div class='q2'>or belching out smoke, </div>
<div class='q2'>or flashing dreadful sparks from their eyes; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_19">19&#160;</span>which had power not only to consume them by their violence, </div>
<div class='q2'>but to destroy them even by the terror of their sight. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_20">20&#160;</span>Yes and without these they might have fallen by a single breath, </div>
<div class='q2'>being pursued by Justice, and scattered abroad by the breath of your power; </div>
<div class='q2'>but you arranged all things by measure, number, and weight. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_21">21&#160;</span>For to be greatly strong is yours at all times. </div>
<div class='q2'>Who could withstand the might of your arm? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_22">22&#160;</span>Because the whole world before you is as a grain in a balance, </div>
<div class='q2'>and as a drop of dew that comes down upon the earth in the morning. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_23">23&#160;</span>But you have mercy on all men, because you have power to do all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you overlook the sins of men to the end that they may repent. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_24">24&#160;</span>For you love all things that are, </div>
<div class='q2'>and abhor none of the things which you made; </div>
<div class='q2'>For you never would have formed anything if you hated it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_25">25&#160;</span>How would anything have endured unless you had willed it? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or that which was not called by you, how would it have been preserved? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS11_26">26&#160;</span>But you spare all things, because they are yours, </div>
<div class='q2'>O Sovereign Lord, you who love the living.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS12_0'> 12</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_1">1&#160;</span>For your incorruptible spirit is in all things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_2">2&#160;</span>Therefore you convict little by little those who fall from the right way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and, putting them in remembrance by the things wherein they sin, you admonish them, </div>
<div class='q2'>that escaping from their wickedness they may believe in you, O Lord. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_3">3&#160;</span>For truly the old inhabitants of your holy land, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_4">4&#160;</span>hating them because they practiced detestable works of enchantments and unholy rites— </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_5">5&#160;</span> <a href='#FN34' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a>merciless slaughters of children </div>
<div class='q2'>and sacrificial banquets of men’s flesh and of blood— </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_6">6&#160;</span>allies in an impious fellowship, </div>
<div class='q2'>and murderers of their own helpless babes, </div>
<div class='q2'>it was your counsel to destroy by the hands of our fathers; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_7">7&#160;</span>that the land which in your sight is most precious of all </div>
<div class='q2'>might receive a worthy colony of God’s servants.<a href='#FN35' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_8">8&#160;</span>Nevertheless you even spared these as men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you sent hornets<a href='#FN36' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> as forerunners of your army, </div>
<div class='q2'>to cause them to perish little by little. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_9">9&#160;</span>Not that you were unable to subdue the ungodly under the hand of the righteous in battle, </div>
<div class='q2'>or by terrible beasts or by a stern word to make away with them at once, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_10">10&#160;</span>but judging them little by little you gave them a chance to repent, </div>
<div class='q2'>not being ignorant that their nature by birth was evil, </div>
<div class='q2'>their wickedness inborn, </div>
<div class='q2'>and that their manner of thought would never be changed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_11">11&#160;</span>For they were a cursed seed from the beginning. </div>
<div class='q2'>It wasn’t through fear of any that you left them unpunished for their sins. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_12">12&#160;</span>For who will say, “What have you done?” </div>
<div class='q2'>Or “Who will withstand your judgment?” </div>
<div class='q'>Who will accuse you for the perishing of nations which you caused? </div>
<div class='q2'>Or who will come and stand before you as an avenger for unrighteous men? </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_13">13&#160;</span>For there isn’t any God beside you that cares for all, </div>
<div class='q2'>that you might show that you didn’t judge unrighteously. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_14">14&#160;</span>No king or prince will be able to confront you </div>
<div class='q2'>about those whom you have punished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_15">15&#160;</span>But being righteous, you rule all things righteously, </div>
<div class='q2'>deeming it a thing alien from your power </div>
<div class='q2'>to condemn one who doesn’t deserve to be punished. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_16">16&#160;</span>For your strength is the source of righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your sovereignty over all makes you to forbear all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_17">17&#160;</span>For when men don’t believe that you are perfect in power, you show your strength, </div>
<div class='q2'><a href='#FN37' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a>and in dealing with those who think this, you confuse their boldness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_18">18&#160;</span>But you, being sovereign in strength, judge in gentleness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with great forbearance you govern us; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the power is yours whenever you desire it. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_19">19&#160;</span>But you taught your people by such works as these, </div>
<div class='q2'>how the righteous must be kind. </div>
<div class='q'>You made your sons to have good hope, </div>
<div class='q2'>because you give repentance when men have sinned. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_20">20&#160;</span>For if on those who were enemies of your servants<a href='#FN38' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> and deserving of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>you took vengeance with so great deliberation and indulgence, </div>
<div class='q2'>giving them times and opportunities when they might escape from their wickedness, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_21">21&#160;</span>with how great care you judged your sons, </div>
<div class='q2'>to whose fathers you gave oaths and covenants of good promises! </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_22">22&#160;</span>Therefore while you chasten us, you scourge our enemies ten thousand times more, </div>
<div class='q2'>to the intent that we may ponder your goodness when we judge, </div>
<div class='q2'>and when we are judged may look for mercy. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_23">23&#160;</span>Therefore also the unrighteous that lived in a life of folly, </div>
<div class='q2'>you tormented through their own abominations. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_24">24&#160;</span>For truly they went astray very far in the ways of error, </div>
<div class='q2'>Taking as gods those animals<a href='#FN39' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> which even among their enemies were held in dishonor, </div>
<div class='q2'>deceived like foolish babes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore, as to unreasoning children, you sent your judgment to mock them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_26">26&#160;</span>But those who would not be admonished by mild correction </div>
<div class='q2'>will experience the deserved judgment of God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS12_27">27&#160;</span>For through the sufferings they were indignant of, </div>
<div class='q2'>being punished in these creatures which they supposed to be gods, </div>
<div class='q2'>they saw and recognized as the true God him whom they previously refused to know. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore also the result of extreme condemnation came upon them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS13_0'> 13</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_1">1&#160;</span>For truly all men who had no perception of God were foolish by nature, </div>
<div class='q2'>and didn’t gain power to know him who exists from the good things that are seen. </div>
<div class='q2'>They didn’t recognize the architect from his works. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_2">2&#160;</span>But they thought that either fire, or wind, or swift air, </div>
<div class='q2'>or circling stars, or raging water, or luminaries of heaven </div>
<div class='q2'>were gods that rule the world. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_3">3&#160;</span>If it was through delight in their beauty that they took them to be gods, </div>
<div class='q2'>let them know how much better their Sovereign Lord is than these, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the first author of beauty created them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_4">4&#160;</span>But if it was through astonishment at their power and influence, </div>
<div class='q2'>then let them understand from them how much more powerful he who formed them is. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_5">5&#160;</span>For from the greatness of the beauty of created things, </div>
<div class='q2'>mankind forms the corresponding perception of their Maker.<a href='#FN40' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_6">6&#160;</span>But yet for these men there is but small blame, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they too perhaps go astray </div>
<div class='q2'>while they are seeking God and desiring to find him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_7">7&#160;</span>For they diligently search while living among his works, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they trust their sight that the things that they look at are beautiful. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_8">8&#160;</span>But again even they are not to be excused. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_9">9&#160;</span>For if they had power to know so much, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they should be able to explore the world, </div>
<div class='q2'>how is it that they didn’t find the Sovereign Lord sooner? </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_10">10&#160;</span>But they were miserable, and their hopes were in dead things, </div>
<div class='q2'>who called them gods which are works of men’s hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>gold and silver, skillfully made, and likenesses of animals, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a useless stone, the work of an ancient hand. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_11">11&#160;</span>Yes and some<a href='#FN41' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> woodcutter might saw down a tree that is easily moved, </div>
<div class='q2'>skillfully strip away all its bark, </div>
<div class='q2'>and fashion it in attractive form, make a useful vessel to serve his life’s needs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_12">12&#160;</span>Burning the scraps from his handiwork to cook his food, </div>
<div class='q2'>he eats his fill. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_13">13&#160;</span>Taking a discarded scrap which served no purpose, </div>
<div class='q2'>a crooked piece of wood and full of knots, </div>
<div class='q2'>he carves it with the diligence of his idleness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and shapes it by the skill of his idleness. </div>
<div class='q'>He shapes it in the image of a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_14">14&#160;</span>or makes it like some worthless animal, </div>
<div class='q2'>smearing it with something red, painting it red, </div>
<div class='q2'>and smearing over every stain in it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_15">15&#160;</span>Having made a worthy chamber for it, </div>
<div class='q2'>he sets it in a wall, securing it with iron. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_16">16&#160;</span>He plans for it that it may not fall down, </div>
<div class='q2'>knowing that it is unable to help itself </div>
<div class='q2'>(for truly it is an image, and needs help). </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_17">17&#160;</span>When he makes his prayer concerning goods and his marriage and children, </div>
<div class='q2'>he is not ashamed to speak to that which has no life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_18">18&#160;</span>Yes, for health, he calls upon that which is weak. </div>
<div class='q2'>For life, he implores that which is dead. </div>
<div class='q2'>For aid, he supplicates that which has no experience. </div>
<div class='q2'>For a good journey, he asks that which can’t so much as move a step. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS13_19">19&#160;</span>And for profit in business and good success of his hands, </div>
<div class='q2'>he asks ability from that which has hands with no ability.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS14_0'> 14</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_1">1&#160;</span>Again, one preparing to sail, and about to journey over raging waves, </div>
<div class='q2'>calls upon a piece of wood more fragile than the vessel that carries him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_2">2&#160;</span>For the hunger for profit planned it, </div>
<div class='q2'>and wisdom was the craftsman who built it. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_3">3&#160;</span>Your providence, O Father, guides it along, </div>
<div class='q2'>because even in the sea you gave a way, </div>
<div class='q2'>and in the waves a sure path, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_4">4&#160;</span>showing that you can save out of every danger, </div>
<div class='q2'>that even a man without skill may put to sea. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_5">5&#160;</span>It is your will that the works of your wisdom should be not ineffective. </div>
<div class='q2'>Therefore men also entrust their lives to a little piece of wood, </div>
<div class='q2'>and passing through the surge on a raft come safely to land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_6">6&#160;</span>For<a href='#FN42' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> in the old time also, when proud giants were perishing, </div>
<div class='q2'>the hope of the world, taking refuge on a raft, </div>
<div class='q2'>your hand guided the seed of generations of the race of men. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_7">7&#160;</span>For blessed is wood through which comes righteousness; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_8">8&#160;</span>but the idol made with hands is accursed, itself and he that made it; </div>
<div class='q2'>because his was the working, and the corruptible thing was called a god. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_9">9&#160;</span>For both the ungodly and his ungodliness are alike hateful to God; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_10">10&#160;</span>for truly the deed will be punished together with him who committed it. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_11">11&#160;</span>Therefore also there will be a visitation among the idols of the nation, </div>
<div class='q2'>because, though formed of things which God created, they were made an abomination, </div>
<div class='q2'>stumbling blocks to the souls of men, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a snare to the feet of the foolish. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_12">12&#160;</span>For the devising of idols was the beginning of fornication, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the invention of them the corruption of life. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_13">13&#160;</span>For they didn’t exist from the beginning, and they won’t exist forever. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_14">14&#160;</span>For by the boastfulness of men they entered into the world, </div>
<div class='q2'>and therefore a speedy end was planned for them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_15">15&#160;</span>For a father worn with untimely grief, </div>
<div class='q2'>making an image of the child quickly taken away, </div>
<div class='q2'>now honored him as a god which was then a dead human being, </div>
<div class='q2'>and delivered to those that were under him mysteries and solemn rites. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_16">16&#160;</span>Afterward the ungodly custom, in process of time grown strong, was kept as a law, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the engraved images received worship by the commandments of princes. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_17">17&#160;</span>And when men could not honor them in presence because they lived far off, </div>
<div class='q2'>imagining the likeness from afar, </div>
<div class='q2'>they made a visible image of the king whom they honored, </div>
<div class='q2'>that by their zeal they might flatter the absent as if present. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_18">18&#160;</span>But worship was raised to a yet higher pitch, even by those who didn’t know him, </div>
<div class='q2'>urged forward by the ambition of the architect; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_19">19&#160;</span>for he, wishing perhaps to please his ruler, </div>
<div class='q2'>used his art to force the likeness toward a greater beauty. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_20">20&#160;</span>So the multitude, allured by reason of the grace of his handiwork, </div>
<div class='q2'>now consider an object of devotion him that a little before was honored as a man. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_21">21&#160;</span>And this became an ambush, </div>
<div class='q2'>because men, in bondage either to calamity or to tyranny, </div>
<div class='q2'>invested stones and stocks with the Name that shouldn’t be shared. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_22">22&#160;</span>Afterward it was not enough for them to go astray concerning the knowledge of God, </div>
<div class='q2'>but also, while they live in a great war of ignorance, they call a multitude of evils peace. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_23">23&#160;</span>For either slaughtering children in solemn rites, or celebrating secret mysteries, </div>
<div class='q2'>or holding frenzied revels of strange customs, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_24">24&#160;</span>no longer do they guard either life or purity of marriage, </div>
<div class='q2'>but one brings upon another either death by treachery, or anguish by adultery. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_25">25&#160;</span>And all things confusedly are filled with blood and murder, theft and deceit, </div>
<div class='q2'>corruption, faithlessness, tumult, perjury, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_26">26&#160;</span>confusion about what is good, forgetfulness of favors, </div>
<div class='q2'>ingratitude for benefits, </div>
<div class='q2'>defiling of souls, confusion of sex, </div>
<div class='q2'>disorder in marriage, adultery and wantonness. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_27">27&#160;</span>For the worship of idols that may not be named <a href='#FN43' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>✡</a> </div>
<div class='q2'>is a beginning and cause and end of every evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_28">28&#160;</span>For their worshipers either make merry to madness, or prophesy lies, </div>
<div class='q2'>or live unrighteously, or lightly commit perjury. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_29">29&#160;</span>For putting their trust in lifeless idols, </div>
<div class='q2'>when they have sworn a wicked oath, they expect not to suffer harm. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_30">30&#160;</span>But on both counts, the just doom will pursue them, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they had evil thoughts of God by giving heed to idols, </div>
<div class='q2'>and swore unrighteously in deceit through contempt for holiness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS14_31">31&#160;</span>For it is not the power of things by which men swear, </div>
<div class='q2'>but it is the just penalty for those who sin </div>
<div class='q2'>that always visits the transgression of the unrighteous. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS15_0'> 15</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_1">1&#160;</span>But you, our God, are gracious and true, </div>
<div class='q2'>patient, and in mercy ordering all things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_2">2&#160;</span>For even if we sin, we are yours, knowing your dominion; </div>
<div class='q2'>but we will not sin, knowing that we have been accounted yours. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_3">3&#160;</span>For to be acquainted with you is<a href='#FN44' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> perfect righteousness, </div>
<div class='q2'>and to know your dominion is the root of immortality. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_4">4&#160;</span>For we weren’t led astray by any evil plan of men’s, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor yet by painters’ fruitless labor, </div>
<div class='q2'>a form stained with varied colors, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_5">5&#160;</span>the sight of which leads fools into<a href='#FN45' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> lust. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their desire is for the breathless form of a dead image. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_6">6&#160;</span>Lovers of evil things, and worthy of such hopes, </div>
<div class='q2'>are those who make, desire, and worship them. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_7">7&#160;</span>For a potter, kneading soft earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>laboriously molds each article for our service. </div>
<div class='q'>He fashions out of the same clay </div>
<div class='q2'>both the vessels that minister to clean uses, and those of a contrary sort, </div>
<div class='q2'>all in like manner. </div>
<div class='q'>What shall be the use of each article of either sort, </div>
<div class='q2'>the potter is the judge. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_8">8&#160;</span>Also, laboring to an evil end, he molds a vain god out of the same clay, </div>
<div class='q2'>he who, having but a little before been made of earth, </div>
<div class='q2'>after a short space goes his way to the earth out of which he was taken, </div>
<div class='q2'>when he is required to render back the<a href='#FN46' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> soul which was lent him. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_9">9&#160;</span>However he has anxious care, </div>
<div class='q2'>not because his powers must fail, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor because his span of life is short; </div>
<div class='q'>But he compares himself with goldsmiths and silversmiths, </div>
<div class='q2'>and he imitates molders in<a href='#FN47' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> brass, </div>
<div class='q2'>and considers it great that he molds counterfeit gods. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_10">10&#160;</span>His heart is ashes. </div>
<div class='q2'>His hope is of less value than earth. </div>
<div class='q2'>His life is of less honor than clay, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_11">11&#160;</span>because he was ignorant of him who molded him, </div>
<div class='q2'>and of him that inspired into him<a href='#FN48' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>*</a> an active<a href='#FN49' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>†</a> soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>and breathed into him a vital spirit. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_12">12&#160;</span>But<a href='#FN50' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>‡</a> he accounted our life to be a game, </div>
<div class='q2'>and our<a href='#FN51' epub:type='noteref' class='noteref'>§</a> lifetime a festival for profit; </div>
<div class='q'>for, he says, one must get gain however one can, even if it is by evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_13">13&#160;</span>For this man, beyond all others, knows that he sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>out of earthy matter making brittle vessels and engraved images. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_14">14&#160;</span>But most foolish and more miserable than a baby, </div>
<div class='q2'>are the enemies of your people, who oppressed them; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_15">15&#160;</span>because they even considered all the idols of the nations to be gods, </div>
<div class='q2'>which have neither the use of eyes for seeing, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor nostrils for drawing breath, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor ears to hear, </div>
<div class='q2'>nor fingers for handling, </div>
<div class='q2'>and their feet are helpless for walking. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_16">16&#160;</span>For a man made them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and one whose own spirit is borrowed molded them; </div>
<div class='q2'>for no one has power as a man to mold a god like himself. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_17">17&#160;</span>But, being mortal, he makes a dead thing by the work of lawless hands; </div>
<div class='q2'>for he is better than the objects of his worship, </div>
<div class='q2'>since he indeed had life, but they never did. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_18">18&#160;</span>Yes, and they worship the creatures that are most hateful, </div>
<div class='q2'>for, being compared as to lack of sense, these are worse than all others; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS15_19">19&#160;</span>Neither, as seen beside other creatures, are they beautiful, so that one should desire them, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they have escaped both the praise of God and his blessing.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS16_0'> 16</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_1">1&#160;</span>For this cause, they were deservedly punished through creatures like those which they worship, </div>
<div class='q2'>and tormented through a multitude of vermin. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_2">2&#160;</span>Instead of this punishment, you, giving benefits to your people, </div>
<div class='q2'>prepared quails for food, </div>
<div class='q'>a delicacy to satisfy the desire of their appetite, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_3">3&#160;</span>to the end that your enemies, desiring food, </div>
<div class='q2'>might for the hideousness of the creatures sent among them, </div>
<div class='q2'>loathe even the necessary appetite; </div>
<div class='q'>but these, your people, having for a short time suffered lack, </div>
<div class='q2'>might even partake of delicacies. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_4">4&#160;</span>For it was necessary that inescapable lack should come upon those oppressors, </div>
<div class='q2'>but that to these it should only be showed how their enemies were tormented. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_5">5&#160;</span>For even when terrible raging of wild beasts came upon your people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they were perishing by the bites of crooked serpents, </div>
<div class='q2'>your wrath didn’t continue to the uttermost; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_6">6&#160;</span>but for admonition were they troubled for a short time, </div>
<div class='q2'>having a token of salvation </div>
<div class='q2'>to put them in remembrance of the commandment of your law; </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_7">7&#160;</span>for he who turned toward it was not saved because of that which was seen, </div>
<div class='q2'>but because of you, the Savior of all. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_8">8&#160;</span>Yes, and in this you persuaded our enemies </div>
<div class='q2'>that you are he who delivers out of every evil. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_9">9&#160;</span>For the bites of locusts and flies truly killed them. </div>
<div class='q2'>No healing for their life was found, </div>
<div class='q2'>because they were worthy to be punished by such things. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_10">10&#160;</span>But your children weren’t overcome by the very fangs of venomous dragons, </div>
<div class='q2'>for your mercy passed by where they were and healed them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_11">11&#160;</span>For they were bitten to put them in remembrance of your oracles, </div>
<div class='q2'>and were quickly saved, lest, falling into deep forgetfulness, </div>
<div class='q2'>they should become unable to respond to your kindness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_12">12&#160;</span>For truly it was neither herb nor poultice that cured them, </div>
<div class='q2'>but your word, O Lord, which heals all people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_13">13&#160;</span>For you have authority over life and death, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you lead down to the gates of Hades, and lead up again. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_14">14&#160;</span>But though a man kills by his wickedness, </div>
<div class='q2'>he can’t retrieve the spirit that has departed </div>
<div class='q2'>or release the imprisoned soul. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_15">15&#160;</span>But it is not possible to escape your hand; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_16">16&#160;</span>for ungodly men, refusing to know you, were scourged in the strength of your arm, </div>
<div class='q2'>pursued with strange rains and hails and relentless storms, </div>
<div class='q2'>and utterly consumed with fire. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_17">17&#160;</span>For, what was most marvelous, </div>
<div class='q2'>in the water which quenches all things, the fire burned hotter; </div>
<div class='q2'>for the world fights for the righteous. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_18">18&#160;</span>For at one time the flame was restrained, </div>
<div class='q2'>that it might not burn up the creatures sent against the ungodly, </div>
<div class='q2'>but that these themselves as they looked might see that they were chased by the judgment of God. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_19">19&#160;</span>At another time even in the midst of water it burns more intensely than fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>that it may destroy the produce of an unrighteous land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_20">20&#160;</span>Instead of these things, you gave your people angels’ food to eat, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you provided ready-to-eat bread for them from heaven without toil, </div>
<div class='q2'>having the virtue of every pleasant flavor, </div>
<div class='q2'>and agreeable to every taste. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_21">21&#160;</span>For your nature showed your sweetness toward your children, </div>
<div class='q2'>while that bread, serving the desire of the eater, </div>
<div class='q2'>changed itself according to every man’s choice. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_22">22&#160;</span>But snow and ice endured fire, and didn’t melt, </div>
<div class='q2'>that people might know that fire was destroying the fruits of the enemies, </div>
<div class='q2'>burning in the hail and flashing in the rains; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_23">23&#160;</span>and that this fire, again, in order that righteous people may be nourished, </div>
<div class='q2'>has even forgotten its own power. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_24">24&#160;</span>For the creation, ministering to you, its maker, </div>
<div class='q2'>strains its force against the unrighteous for punishment </div>
<div class='q2'>and in kindness, slackens it on behalf of those who trust in you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_25">25&#160;</span>Therefore at that time also, converting itself into all forms, </div>
<div class='q2'>it ministered to your all-nourishing bounty, </div>
<div class='q2'>according to the desire of those who had need, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_26">26&#160;</span>that your children, whom you loved, O Lord, might learn </div>
<div class='q2'>that it is not the growth of crops that nourishes a man, </div>
<div class='q2'>but that your word preserves those who trust you. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_27">27&#160;</span>For that which was not destroyed by fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>melted away when it was simply warmed by a faint sunbeam, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_28">28&#160;</span>that it might be known that we must rise before the sun to give you thanks, </div>
<div class='q2'>and must pray to you at the dawning of the light; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS16_29">29&#160;</span>for the hope of the unthankful will melt as the winter’s hoar frost, </div>
<div class='q2'>and will flow away as water that has no use. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS17_0'> 17</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_1">1&#160;</span>For your judgments are great, and hard to interpret; </div>
<div class='q2'>therefore undisciplined souls went astray. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_2">2&#160;</span>For when lawless men had supposed that they held a holy nation in their power, </div>
<div class='q2'>they, prisoners of darkness, and bound in the fetters of a long night, </div>
<div class='q2'>kept close beneath their roofs, </div>
<div class='q2'>lay exiled from the eternal providence. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_3">3&#160;</span>For while they thought that they were unseen in <span class='add'>their </span> secret sins, </div>
<div class='q2'>they were divided from one another by a dark curtain of forgetfulness, </div>
<div class='q2'>stricken with terrible awe, and very troubled by apparitions. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_4">4&#160;</span>For neither did the dark recesses that held them guard them from fears, </div>
<div class='q2'>but terrifying sounds rang around them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dismal phantoms appeared with unsmiling faces. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_5">5&#160;</span>And no power of fire prevailed to give light, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither were the brightest flames of the stars strong enough to illuminate that gloomy night; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_6">6&#160;</span>but only the glimmering of a self-kindled fire appeared to them, full of fear. </div>
<div class='q2'>In terror, they considered the things which they saw </div>
<div class='q2'>to be worse than that sight, on which they could not gaze. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_7">7&#160;</span> The mockeries of their magic arts were powerless, now, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a shameful rebuke of their boasted understanding: </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_8">8&#160;</span>For those who promised to drive away terrors and disorders from a sick soul, </div>
<div class='q2'>these were sick with a ludicrous fearfulness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_9">9&#160;</span>For even if no troubling thing frighted them, </div>
<div class='q2'>yet, scared with the creeping of vermin and hissing of serpents, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_10">10&#160;</span>they perished trembling in fear, </div>
<div class='q2'>refusing even to look at the air, which could not be escaped on any side. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_11">11&#160;</span> For wickedness, condemned by a witness within, is a coward thing, </div>
<div class='q2'>and, being pressed hard by conscience, always has added forecasts of the worst. </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_12">12&#160;</span>For fear is nothing else but a surrender of the help which reason offers; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_13">13&#160;</span>and from within, the expectation of being less </div>
<div class='q2'>prefers ignorance of the cause that brings the torment. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_14">14&#160;</span>But they, all through the night which was powerless indeed, </div>
<div class='q2'>and which came upon them out of the recesses of powerless Hades, </div>
<div class='q2'>sleeping the same sleep, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_15">15&#160;</span>now were haunted by monstrous apparitions, </div>
<div class='q2'>and now were paralyzed by their soul’s surrendering; </div>
<div class='q2'>for sudden and unexpected fear came upon them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_16">16&#160;</span>So then whoever it might be, sinking down in his place, </div>
<div class='q2'>was kept captive, shut up in that prison which was not barred with iron; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_17">17&#160;</span>for whether he was a farmer, or a shepherd, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a laborer whose toils were in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>he was overtaken, and endured that inescapable sentence; </div>
<div class='q2'>for they were all bound with one chain of darkness. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_18">18&#160;</span>Whether there was a whistling wind, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a melodious sound of birds among the spreading branches, </div>
<div class='q2'>or a measured fall of water running violently, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_19">19&#160;</span>or a harsh crashing of rocks hurled down, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the swift course of animals bounding along unseen, </div>
<div class='q2'>or the voice of wild beasts harshly roaring, </div>
<div class='q2'>or an echo rebounding from the hollows of the mountains, </div>
<div class='q2'>all these things paralyzed them with terror. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_20">20&#160;</span>For the whole world was illuminated with clear light, </div>
<div class='q2'>and was occupied with unhindered works, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS17_21">21&#160;</span>while over them alone was spread a heavy night, </div>
<div class='q2'>an image of the darkness that should afterward receive them; </div>
<div class='q2'>but to themselves, they were heavier than darkness.  </div>
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS18_0'> 18</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_1">1&#160;</span>But for your holy ones there was great light. </div>
<div class='q2'>Their enemies, hearing their voice but not seeing their form, </div>
<div class='q2'>counted it a happy thing that they too had suffered, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_2">2&#160;</span>yet for that they do not hurt them, though wronged by them before, they are thankful; </div>
<div class='q2'>and because they had been at variance with them, they begged for pardon. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_3">3&#160;</span>Therefore you provided a burning pillar of fire, </div>
<div class='q2'>to be a guide for your people’s unknown journey, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a harmless sun for their glorious exile. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_4">4&#160;</span>For the Egyptians well deserved to be deprived of light and imprisoned by darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>they who had imprisoned your children, </div>
<div class='q2'>through whom the incorruptible light of the law was to be given to the race of men. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_5">5&#160;</span>After they had taken counsel to kill the babes of the holy ones, </div>
<div class='q2'>and when a single child had been abandoned and saved to convict them of their sin, </div>
<div class='q2'>you took away from them their multitude of children, </div>
<div class='q2'>and destroyed all their army together in a mighty flood. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_6">6&#160;</span>Our fathers were made aware of that night beforehand, </div>
<div class='q2'>that, having sure knowledge, they might be cheered by the oaths which they had trusted. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_7">7&#160;</span>Salvation of the righteous and destruction of the enemies was expected by your people. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_8">8&#160;</span>For as you took vengeance on the adversaries, </div>
<div class='q2'>by the same means, calling us to yourself, you glorified us. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_9">9&#160;</span>For holy children of good men offered sacrifice in secret, </div>
<div class='q2'>and with one consent they agreed to the covenant of the divine law, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they would partake alike in the same good things and the same perils, </div>
<div class='q2'>the fathers already leading the sacred songs of praise. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_10">10&#160;</span>But the discordant cry of the enemies echoed back, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a pitiful voice of lamentation for children was spread abroad. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_11">11&#160;</span>Both servant and master were punished with the same just doom, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the commoner suffering the same as king; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_12">12&#160;</span>Yes, they all together, under one form of death, </div>
<div class='q2'>had corpses without number. </div>
<div class='q'>For the living were not sufficient even to bury them, </div>
<div class='q2'>Since at a single stroke, their most cherished offspring was consumed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_13">13&#160;</span>For while they were disbelieving all things by reason of the enchantments, </div>
<div class='q2'>upon the destruction of the firstborn they confessed the people to be God’s children. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_14">14&#160;</span>For while peaceful silence wrapped all things, </div>
<div class='q2'>and night in her own swiftness was half spent, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_15">15&#160;</span>your all-powerful word leaped from heaven, from the royal throne, </div>
<div class='q2'>a stern warrior, into the midst of the doomed land, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_16">16&#160;</span>bearing as a sharp sword your authentic commandment, </div>
<div class='q2'>and standing, it filled all things with death, </div>
<div class='q2'>and while it touched the heaven it stood upon the earth. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_17">17&#160;</span>Then immediately apparitions in dreams terribly troubled them, </div>
<div class='q2'>and unexpected fears came upon them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_18">18&#160;</span>And each, one thrown here half dead, another there, </div>
<div class='q2'>made known why he was dying; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_19">19&#160;</span>for the dreams, disturbing them, forewarned them of this, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they might not perish without knowing why they were afflicted. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_20">20&#160;</span>The experience of death also touched the righteous, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a multitude were destroyed in the wilderness, </div>
<div class='q2'>but the wrath didn’t last long. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_21">21&#160;</span>For a blameless man hurried to be their champion, </div>
<div class='q2'>bringing the weapon of his own ministry, </div>
<div class='q2'>prayer, and the atoning sacrifice of incense. </div>
<div class='q'>He withstood the indignation and set an end to the calamity, </div>
<div class='q2'>showing that he was your servant. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_22">22&#160;</span>And he overcame the anger, </div>
<div class='q2'>not by strength of body, not by force of weapons, </div>
<div class='q2'>but by his word, he subdued the avenger </div>
<div class='q2'>by bringing to remembrance oaths and covenants made with the fathers. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_23">23&#160;</span>For when the dead had already fallen in heaps one upon another, </div>
<div class='q2'>he intervened and stopped the wrath, </div>
<div class='q2'>and cut off its way to the living. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_24">24&#160;</span>For the whole world was pictured on his long robe, </div>
<div class='q2'>and the glories of the fathers were upon the engraving of the four rows of precious stones, </div>
<div class='q2'>and your majesty was upon the diadem on his head. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS18_25">25&#160;</span>The destroyer yielded to these, and they feared; </div>
<div class='q2'>for it was enough only to test the wrath. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div> 
<div class='psalmlabel' id='WS19_0'> 19</div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_1">1&#160;</span>But indignation without mercy came upon the ungodly to the end; </div>
<div class='q2'>for God also foreknew their future, </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_2">2&#160;</span>how, having changed their minds to let your people go, </div>
<div class='q2'>and having sped them eagerly on their way, </div>
<div class='q2'>they would change their minds and pursue them. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_3">3&#160;</span>For while they were yet in the midst of their mourning, </div>
<div class='q2'>and lamenting at the graves of the dead, </div>
<div class='q2'>they made another foolish decision, </div>
<div class='q2'>and pursued as fugitives those whom they had begged to leave and driven out. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_4">4&#160;</span>For the doom which they deserved was drawing them to this end, </div>
<div class='q2'>and it made them forget the things that had happened to them, </div>
<div class='q2'>that they might fill up the punishment which was yet lacking from their torments, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_5">5&#160;</span>and that your people might journey on by a marvelous road, </div>
<div class='q2'>but they themselves might find a strange death. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_6">6&#160;</span>For the whole creation, each part in its diverse kind, was made new again, </div>
<div class='q2'>complying with your commandments, </div>
<div class='q2'>that your servants might be kept unharmed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_7">7&#160;</span>Then the cloud that overshadowed the camp was seen, </div>
<div class='q2'>and dry land rising up out of what had been water, </div>
<div class='q2'>out of the Red sea an unhindered highway, </div>
<div class='q2'>and a grassy plain out of the violent surge, </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_8">8&#160;</span>by which they passed over with all their army, </div>
<div class='q2'>these who were covered with your hand, </div>
<div class='q2'>having seen strange marvels. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_9">9&#160;</span>For like horses they roamed at large, </div>
<div class='q2'>and they skipped about like lambs, </div>
<div class='q2'>praising you, O Lord, who was their deliverer. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_10">10&#160;</span>For they still remembered the things that happened in the time of their sojourning, </div>
<div class='q2'>how instead of bearing cattle, the land brought forth lice, </div>
<div class='q2'>and instead of fish, the river spewed out a multitude of frogs. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_11">11&#160;</span>But afterwards, they also saw a new kind of birds, </div>
<div class='q2'>when, led on by desire, they asked for luxurious dainties; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_12">12&#160;</span>for, to comfort them, quails came up for them from the sea. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_13">13&#160;</span>Punishments came upon the sinners, </div>
<div class='q2'>not without the signs that were given beforehand by the violence of the thunder, </div>
<div class='q2'>for they justly suffered through their own wickednesses, </div>
<div class='q2'>for the hatred which they practiced toward guests was grievous indeed. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_14">14&#160;</span>For while the others didn’t receive the strangers when they came to them, </div>
<div class='q2'>the Egyptians made slaves of guests who were their benefactors. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_15">15&#160;</span>And not only so, but while punishment of some sort will come upon the former, </div>
<div class='q2'>since they received as enemies those who were aliens; </div>
<div class='q2'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_16">16&#160;</span>because these first welcomed with feastings, </div>
<div class='q2'>and then afflicted with dreadful toils, </div>
<div class='q2'>those who had already shared with them in the same rights. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_17">17&#160;</span>And moreover they were stricken with loss of sight </div>
<div class='q2'>(even as were those others at the righteous man’s doors), </div>
<div class='q2'>when, being surrounded with yawning darkness, </div>
<div class='q2'>they each looked for the passage through his own door. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_18">18&#160;</span>For as the notes of a lute vary the character of the rhythm, </div>
<div class='q2'>even so the elements, changing their order one with another, </div>
<div class='q2'>continuing always in its sound, </div>
<div class='q2'>as may clearly be conjectured from the sight of the things that have happened. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_19">19&#160;</span>For creatures of the dry land were turned into creatures of the waters, </div>
<div class='q2'>and creatures that swim moved upon the land. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_20">20&#160;</span>Fire kept the mastery of its own power in water, </div>
<div class='q2'>and water forgot its quenching nature. </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_21">21&#160;</span>On the contrary, flames didn’t consume flesh of perishable creatures that walked among them, </div>
<div class='q2'>neither did they melt the crystalline grains of ambrosial food that were melted easily. </div>
<div class='b'> &#160; </div>
<div class='q'>
<span class="verse" id="WS19_22">22&#160;</span>For in all things, O Lord, you magnified your people, </div>
<div class='q2'>and you glorified them and didn’t lightly regard them, </div>
<div class='q2'>standing by their side in every time and place. </div><div class="footnote">
<hr />
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN1"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">in goodness. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN2"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Some authorities read </span><span class="fqa">the spirit of wisdom is loving to man. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN3"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">reviler </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN4"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_7"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">the inhabited earth. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN5"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_8"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Some authorities read </span><span class="fqa">nor indeed. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN6"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 1:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, all </span><span class="fqa">the races </span><span class="ft">of creatures </span><span class="fqa">in the world </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN7"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 1:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">a royal house </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN8"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_16"><span class="notemark">§</span> 1:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">Hades </span><span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">him. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN9"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS1_16"><span class="notemark">*</span> 1:16</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">were consumed </span><span class="ft">with love of him </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN10"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 2:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">among </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN11"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_1"><span class="notemark">†</span> 2:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">returned out of Hades </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN12"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_4"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 2:4</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">weighed down. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN13"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS2_5"><span class="notemark">§</span> 2:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">comes again </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN14"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS3_9"><span class="notemark">*</span> 3:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">Those who are faithful through love will live with him </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN15"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS4_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 4:2</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">in the age.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN16"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_7"><span class="notemark">*</span> 5:7</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a class='bibleref' href='PRO.xhtml#PR14_14'>Proverbs 14:14</a>. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN17"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">†</span> 5:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">like foam chased to thinness: </span><span class="ft">or, </span><span class="fqa">as thin foam chased. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN18"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS5_14"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 5:14</a>
 <span class="ft">Most Greek authorities read </span><span class="fqa">hoar frost: </span><span class="ft">some authorities, perhaps rightly, </span><span class="fqa">a spider’s web.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN19"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS6_2"><span class="notemark">*</span> 6:2</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">in the multitudes of your nations </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN20"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 7:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Many authorities read </span><span class="fqa">a mortal man.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN21"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS7_20"><span class="notemark">†</span> 7:20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">spirits </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN22"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 8:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">she. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN23"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS8_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 8:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">Her labors are.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN24"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 9:4</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">children </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN25"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_8"><span class="notemark">†</span> 9:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">a place of sacrifice </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN26"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS9_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 9:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">thrones. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN27"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_1"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:1</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">She. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN28"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">She </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN29"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_6"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 10:6</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">she </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN30"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_10"><span class="notemark">§</span> 10:10</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">she. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN31"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_13"><span class="notemark">*</span> 10:13</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">she. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN32"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS10_15"><span class="notemark">†</span> 10:15</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">she. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN33"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS11_4"><span class="notemark">*</span> 11:4</a>
 <span class="ft">See <a class='bibleref' href='DEU.xhtml#DT8_15'>Deuteronomy 8:15</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS114_8'>Psalm 114:8</a>. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN34"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:5</a>
 <span class="ft">The words rendered </span><span class="fqa">slaughters </span><span class="ft">and </span><span class="fqa">impious </span><span class="ft">in verses 5 and 6 differ but slightly from the readings of the Greek text, which here yield no sense. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN35"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_7"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12:7</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">children </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN36"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 12:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">wasps </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN37"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_17"><span class="notemark">§</span> 12:17</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek text here is perhaps corrupt. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN38"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_20"><span class="notemark">*</span> 12:20</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">children </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN39"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS12_24"><span class="notemark">†</span> 12:24</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">living creatures: </span><span class="ft">and so elsewhere in this book. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN40"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_5"><span class="notemark">*</span> 13:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">is the first maker of them seen.</span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN41"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS13_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 13:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">carpenter who is a woodcutter. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN42"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_6"><span class="notemark">*</span> 14:6</a>
 <span class="ft">The Greek text here may be corrupt. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN43"><p class="x"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS14_27"><span class="notemark">✡</span> 14:27</a>
 <span class="xt"><a class='bibleref' href='EXO.xhtml#EX23_13'>Exodus 23:13</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='PSA.xhtml#PS16_4'>Psalm 16:4</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='HOS.xhtml#HS2_17'>Hosea 2:17</a>; <a class='bibleref' href='WIS.xhtml#WS14_21'>Wisdom 14:21</a></span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN44"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_3"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:3</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">entire. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN45"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_5"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:5</a>
 <span class="ft">Some authorities read </span><span class="fqa">reproach. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN46"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_8"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15:8</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">life </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN47"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_9"><span class="notemark">§</span> 15:9</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">copper </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN48"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_11"><span class="notemark">*</span> 15:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Gr. </span><span class="fqa">a soul that moves to activity. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN49"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_11"><span class="notemark">†</span> 15:11</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">life </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN50"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_12"><span class="notemark">‡</span> 15:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Some authorities read </span><span class="fqa">they accounted. </span></p></aside>
<aside epub:type='footnote' id="FN51"><p class="f"><a class="notebackref" href="#WS15_12"><span class="notemark">§</span> 15:12</a>
 <span class="ft">Or, </span><span class="fqa">way of life </span></p></aside>

<hr />
</div>
</div></body></html>
